


For	my	wife,	Summer

and	my	kids:

Joshua,	Phillip,	Elizabeth,	and	Michelle.

I	love	you	with	all	my	heart

and	thank	you	that	you	put	up	with	all

my	crazy	endeavours!





CON TEN TS

1. The	Call	For	Orion

2. The	Watch

3. Chocolate

4. Dust	Valley	Desert	Oasis	Resort

5. John	Taylor	Sebastian

6. The	ArrowHead

7. The	Information	Center

8. The	Mysterious	Symbol

9. Disturbing	Thoughts

10. The	Man	in	the	Picture

11. Tom	Tom	and	John	Taylor	Sebastian

12. Coyotes

13. Startling	Discovery

14. Dillon	and	Derek

15. The	Haunted	House

16. More	Questions,	Few	Answers

17. John’s	House

18. The	Mercenary

19. Escape	from	the	Hotel

20. An	Encounter	with	a	Snake

21. Into	the	Darkness

22. Spiders

23. The	Lab

24. The	Monster

25. The	Fight	for	their	Lives!

26. Answers

27. The	Vacation’s	End

Epilogue

Also	by	Chad	Stewart

FREE	DOWNLOAD!





1

T H E 	 C A L L 	 F O R 	 O R I O N

The	explosion	ripped	through	the	wall	and	into	the	hallway.	Chunks	of

concrete	and	wood	flew	everywhere.

Kade	was	rocked	backward	by	the	blast	as	he	neared	the	lab	and

hit	 the	 wall	 hard.	 The	 blow	 knocked	 the	 wind	 from	 him	 as	 he	 crumpled	 to	 the ground.	His	ears	rang,	his	vision	blurred,	and	he	could	smell	smoke	and	saw	the

flicker	 of	 a	 fire	 down	 the	 hall	 across	 from	 where	 the	 lab	 was.	 Kade	 heard	 the alarms	 ring	 out	 and	 felt	 the	 cool	 spray	 of	 the	 sprinkler	 systems	 as	 they	 were activated	from	the	heat	of	the	fire.	The	downpour	soaked	his	white	lab	coat	in	a matter	of	seconds.

He	 tried	 to	 get	 up,	 but	 the	 room	 tilted	 and	 whirled	 around	 him	 and	 his	 feet slid	out	from	under	him.	His	head	hurt	and	the	hallway	spun.	He	tried	to	shake

off	 the	 dizziness	 and,	 as	 his	 vision	 started	 to	 come	 around,	 he	 noticed	 a	 figure exit	from	the	lab.	The	person	was	dressed	all	in	black	and	Kade	saw	that	he	was

coming	his	way;	stepping	over	the	rubble	and	nimbly	working	his	way	carefully

down	 the	 hall.	 Kade	 tried	 again	 to	 rise,	 but	 he	 couldn’t.	 Pain	 throbbed	 in	 the back	of	his	head	and	neck.	It	was	no	use;	he	felt	as	though	all	the	strength	in	him was	 sapped	 out.	 All	 he	 could	 do	 was	 lean	 against	 the	 wall	 and	 hope	 that	 help would	come	soon.

The	 intruder	 strode	 down	 the	 hall	 and	 stood	 above	 Kade,	 looking	 down	 at him.	The	man’s	face	was	hidden	by	a	mask	so	that	he	couldn’t	make	out	who	it

was.	As	the	figure	looked	at	him	he	could	sense	somehow	that	he	was	smirking



beneath	the	dark	mask.	The	only	thing	that	Kade	could	see	were	those	piercing

dark	eyes	as	the	unknown	man	stared	intently	at	him.

Kade	feebly	reached	his	hand	out	at	the	man	in	the	mask	but	the	dark	figure

swatted	 it	 away.	 He	 was	 about	 to	 continue	 to	 move	 down	 the	 hallway,	 but suddenly	 stopped.	 He	 looked	 back	 at	 the	 battered	 man	 for	 an	 instant	 before shooting	his	hand	out	and	backhanding	Kade	across	the	face.

The	stinging	blow	hit	him	with	such	force	that	it	sent	his	head	rocking	to	the

side.	The	dizziness	intensified	as	he	felt	the	sharp	crack	of	the	man’s	hand.	He tried	to	shake	it	off,	and	even	attempted	to	stand	again,	but	the	darkness	started to	overcome	him.	His	strength	was	gone.	He	slumped	back	against	the	wall	and

faded	from	consciousness.

“KADE!	 KADE!”	 HE	 HEARD	 A	 WOMAN’S	 VOICE	 YELL	 AT	 HIM	 AS	 HIS	 EYES

flickered	open.	His	head	pounded	and	his	vision	was	blurry	as	he	began	to	wake.

As	 his	 eyes	 focused	 he	 saw	 the	 face	 of	 Trina	 staring	 at	 him;	 concern	 etched across	those	delicate	features.

“Quick!	 I	 need	 medical	 help	 here!”	 she	 turned	 and	 called	 out	 to	 any	 first responder	that	was	near.

By	this	time	the	sprinklers	were	shut	off	and	the	smoke	had	cleared	from	he

hall.	“Are	you	okay?”	she	turned	back	and	asked	her	friend.

He	 nodded	 slightly	 as	 he	 tried	 to	 rise	 but	 then	 fell	 back.	 “I	 think	 so,”	 he managed	to	say.

“What	happened?”

“I	…	I	don’t	know,”	Kade	replied.	“I	was	heading	to	the	lab	when	suddenly

—the	 man!	 There	 was	 a	 man	 leaving	 the	 lab!	 Did	 he	 take	 anything?	 What’s missing?”

“Kade,	I	need	you	to	focus.	What	did	this	man	look	like?”

“He	 was	 …	 he	 was	 tall.	 No,	 I	 was	 laying	 on	 the	 ground.”	 Kade	 rubbed	 his forehead.	The	details	in	his	mind	were	as	jumbled	as	the	rubble	around	him.	“I

think	he	liked	that	I	was	hurt.”



Trina’s	eyes	closed,	as	if	in	prayer.	“Kade,	what	did	he	look	like?”

“Blackness,”	Kade	whispered.

Trina	moved	aside	while	a	rescuer	came	over	and	started	to	assess	the	man.

“What	did	he	get?”	Kade	asked	again,	concern	evident	in	his	voice.

Trina	shook	her	head	slightly.	“We	don’t	know	yet,”	she	replied.	“Our	teams

are	trying	to	determine	if	anyone	was	killed	in	the	blast	first.”

“Dr.	Johnson!”	Kade	suddenly	exclaimed	as	he	tried	to	rise	once	more.	The

EMT	 put	 a	 hand	 on	 his	 shoulder	 and	 settled	 him	 back.	 “Please	 tell	 me	 that Johnson	is	okay!”

Trina	was	silent.	Kade’s	eyes	went	wide	as	he	realized	what	Trina	was	telling

him	in	her	silence.	A	tear	streaked	his	face.

“You	 need	 to	 rest,”	 the	 rescuer	 said	 as	 another	 one	 came	 over	 with	 a stretcher.	“We	need	to	get	you	to	the	hospital.”

Kade	nodded	weakly	as	he	wiped	the	tear	from	his	face.

Trina	 put	 her	 hand	 on	 his	 arm.	 “Don’t	 worry.	 We’ll	 tell	 you	 everything	 as soon	as	we	have	more	information,”	she	said.

She	 stood	 up	 as	 the	 men	 hoisted	 Kade	 onto	 the	 stretcher.	 Before	 they wheeled	him	away,	he	grabbed	Trina’s	arm	and	looked	up	at	her,	desperation	in

his	eyes.

“You	need	to	do	whatever	it	takes	to	get	these	guys,”	he	declared.	“Whatever

it	takes!	For	Johnson.”

TRINA	WALKED	INTO	THE	LAB	A	FEW	HOURS	LATER	WITH	A	FORENSIC	EXPERT	WHO

was	 trying	 to	 determine	 all	 the	 elements	 which	 played	 a	 factor	 in	 the	 recent events.	 She	 could	 see	 overturned	 tables,	 pieces	 of	 equipment	 that	 were	 blown apart,	and	some	stains	of	blood	where	Dr.	Johnson	had	been	found.	Fortunately,

the	 invasion	 happened	 a	 few	 hours	 after	 Trichem	 Labs	 officially	 closed	 for	 the day	and	most	of	the	staff	had	already	left	for	the	evening.

“We’re	 conducting	 an	 autopsy	 on	 the	 body	 of	 Dr.	 Johnson	 in	 order	 to

determine	 if	 he	 was	 killed	 before	 the	 explosion,	 or	 if	 that	 was	 the	 cause	 of

death,”	the	forensic	expert	stated	matter-of-factly.

“Why	 did	 you	 have	 to	 be	 so	 committed	 to	 your	 work?”	 Trina	 whispered	 to herself	as	she	stooped	down	and	examined	the	floor	where	they	found	Johnson’s

body.

“What	was	that?”

“Oh	…	nothing,”	she	replied.

The	lab	looked	like	it	was	something	out	of	a	war	movie.	She	glanced	up	to

where	 the	 security	 cameras	 were	 positioned.	 Some	 of	 them	 looked	 scarred	 and burned.	“Did	those	get	any	relevant	footage	of	the	event?”

“We’re	looking	at	the	recordings	now,	but	so	far	there’s	nothing	conclusive.”

“Nothing	conclusive!”	she	exclaimed	as	anger	brimmed	her	voice.	“How	can

we	have	perfectly	good	security	systems	and	not	know	what	we’re	dealing	with

here?”

“Our	Crime	Scene	Investigation	Team	is	on	it,”	he	replied	sternly.	“If	there’s

something	of	note,	we’ll	find	it.”

“Sorry,”	she	replied	softly.	“Do	you	mind	if	I	take	a	look	around	by	myself?”

“Sure	thing.	Just	try	not	to	disturb	anything.”

Trina	nodded.

Trichem	 labs	 was	 desperate	 to	 find	 out	 who	 had	 done	 this.	 And	 Trina	 was pretty	 sure	 she	 knew	 why	 they	 had	 done	 it	 as	 she	 approached	 the	 walk-in refrigeration	unit.

The	unit	was	recessed	into	the	concrete	wall	which	made	it	a	perfect	spot	to

escape	from	an	explosion.	It’s	massive	steel	door	that	was	singed	and	scratched

on	 the	 outside	 was	 slightly	 ajar.	 She	 opened	 it	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 way	 and	 stepped inside,	surveying	the	many	different	vials	that	lined	the	shelves.	She	stopped	half way	down	and	looked	at	the	empty	rack	that	was	conspicuously	evident	with	the

label	underneath	it	which	read:	Genesis.

She	gasped	and	shook	her	head.	She	squeezed	her	eyes	shut	and	opened	them

again,	 hoping	 she	 had	 seen	 wrong	 the	 first	 time.	 But	 she	 hadn’t.	 Genesis	 was gone.	She	knew	that	whoever	had	taken	this	chemical	compound	had	a	force	in

their	 hands	 that	 was	 more	 powerful	 than	 anything	 they	 could	 imagine.	 They probably	didn’t	even	realize	the	extent	to	which	it	could	be	used;	she	hoped	they

didn’t	realize	the	extent	to	which	it	could	be	used.

She	knew	they	had	to	get	it	back.	They	had	to	do	whatever	it	took.

She	had	but	one	recourse	even	though	it	unsettled	her:	It	was	time	to	call	in

the	Orion	Group.





2

T H E 	 WA T C H

The	day	was	overcast	with	dark	clouds	looming;	threatening	to	pour

down	 its	 wrath	 at	 any	 moment.	 Dillon	 hurried	 across	 the	 street	 and

into	the	dark	forest.	His	dog	Bruno,	a	large	playful	German	Shepherd,

followed	 close	 behind,	 sniffing	 every	 second	 tree	 as	 he	 went.	 This	 place	 held special	 significance	 for	 Dillon;	 it	 was	 where	 his	 most	 thrilling	 adventures	 took place.	 Whenever	 he	 was	 over	 here,	 Dillon	 could	 pretend	 to	 be	 anything.	 And today.	 Today,	 Dillon	 was	 a	 fearless	 adventurer,	 in	 search	 of	 the	 lost	 treasure	 of The	Ancient	Skull!

As	 Dillon	 stepped	 into	 the	 dark	 forest,	 the	 area	 around	 him	 transformed	 in his	mind’s	eye.	No	longer	was	it	filled	with	thick	pine,	fir,	and	spruce	trees,	but now	he	was	overshadowed	by	the	dark	canopy	of	the	tropical	Amazon	forest.

He	looked	around	at	his	surroundings,	taking	careful	stock	of	where	he	was;

he	knew	that	every	forward	scout	would	tell	you	that	it’s	all	too	easy	to	lose	your bearings	in	this	kind	of	thick,	desolate	forest.

The	 air	 was	 dank,	 filled	 with	 the	 moisture	 of	 a	 recent	 rain.	 As	 he	 moved carefully	through	the	trees,	following	the	small	trail	he	had	unearthed,	he	noticed the	tracks	he	had	been	looking	for! I	knew	it	was	true! he	thought	to	himself.

For	 years	 everyone	 had	 told	 him	 that	 the	 Amazon	 creatures	 known	 as	 the Giant	Hape	Crushers	were	just	a	fantasy;	a	myth	that	was	created	to	keep	people

from	exploring	this	part	of	the	forest.	But	now	Dillon	knew	it	was	not!	For	right in	front	of	him	were	the	very	tracks	that	proved	his	theory.	And	they	were	fresh!

He	 knew	 this	 could	 only	 mean	 one	 thing:	 he	 was	 close	 to	 the	 fortress	 of	 the Ancient	 Skull,	 the	 legendary	 city	 of	 monsters,	 which	 held	 such	 gold	 and	 glory for	 the	 one	 who	 could	 find	 it.	 Oh	 …	 and	 also	 danger	 and	 possible	 death.	 That was	okay	with	Dillon	though	as	he	knew	the	risks.	He	had	trained	all	his	life	for this	moment.	A	little	danger	wasn’t	going	to	stop	him	now!

Suddenly	 there	 was	 a	 massive	 sound	 of	 crashing	 trees	 and	 low	 guttural grunts	 as	 something	 huge	 barrelled	 through	 the	 trees	 toward	 him.	 He	 quickly dived	to	the	side	and	rolled	off	the	path	and	through	the	brush,	landing	firmly	on his	 feet	 in	 a	 ready	 stance.	 Sliding	 his	 long	 slender	 sabre	 from	 its	 sheath	 he readied	himself	for	the	fight.

The	creature	blew	through	the	trees	with	ferocity,	sending	leaves	everywhere

and	splintering	branches	from	their	perch	upon	the	Amazon	trunks.	It	was	huge;

much	 taller	 than	 Dillon.	 Even	 though	 it	 was	 slightly	 hunched	 Dillon	 could	 tell that	it	was	at	least	eight	feet	in	height.	It	had	the	face	of	a	man	but	the	teeth	of	a gorilla.	Its	huge	mass	was	ripped	with	muscle,	and	the	way	it	stood	and	walked

resembled	that	of	an	ape.	Its	upper	body	was	hairless	while	its	lower	body	had

thick	ape-hair	all	over	it.	He	had	to	dive	out	of	the	way	in	order	to	avoid	being crushed	under	the	massive	hulk	of	the	beast	and	the	flying	debris	it	has	caused!

He	rolled	around	and	slashed	at	the	back	of	the	creature’s	legs	but	the	beast’s

hide	was	too	thick	to	do	any	damage.	It	turned	around	and	Dillon	saw	its	terrible red	eyes	boring	into	him.	It	roared.	Spittle	sprayed	from	its	mouth	as	it	issued	its challenge.	 And	 its	 breath!	 Oh	 the	 stench!	 Despite	 the	 frightening	 nature	 of	 the creature	Dillon’s	resolve	to	make	it	to	the	fortress	of	The	Ancient	Skull	was	not deterred.	Dillon’s	resolve	to	fight	his	way	through	was	at	its	height.

It	came	in	with	its	fangs	barred,	but	Dillon	nimbly	dodged	out	of	the	way	and

delivered	another	blow,	this	time	in	the	thigh.	Clearly	it	was	irritated	as	it	roared; spit	 issuing	 from	 its	 foul	 mouth	 …	 again.	 Dillon	 laughed.	 That	 must	 have confused	the	dim-witted	creature,	for	it	looked	at	him	with	a	puzzled	expression on	its	face.	This	gave	Dillon	the	opportunity	he	needed	to	dive	gracefully	around the	 side	 of	 the	 creature,	 roll,	 and	 come	 up	 in	 a	 dead	 run	 down	 the	 path	 as	 he sheathed	 his	 sword.	 Dillon	 knew	 now	 that	 he	 couldn’t	 fight	 this	 thing	 on	 even ground.	It	was	eight	feet	tall	with	razor	sharp	fangs,	and	breath	that	rivalled	even

his	little	sister	Gwen’s	when	she	woke	up	in	the	morning!

No,	 for	 now,	 he	 was	 content	 running	 through	 the	 woods	 like	 a	 maniac, seeking	for	some	advantage	he	could	use	against	the	beast.	And	there	it	was:	the bridge	of	Kazakdoon!

The	bridge	stood	about	thirty	feet	long	and	spanned	a	gulf	that	was	at	least	a

thousand	feet	deep!

As	he	started	to	run	across	the	bridge	he	began	to	feel	the	sway	of	it	and	the

warm	 wind	 on	 his	 face.	 Dillon	 knew	 that	 he	 was	 in	 more	 trouble	 than	 he	 first realized	when,	at	the	half	way	point	of	the	bridge,	he	heard	the	roar	of	the	Giant Hape	Crusher	as	it	crashed	through	the	trees	and	onto	the	bridge.	The	sudden	jolt of	its	weight	sent	Dillon	flying	into	the	air,	but	he	somehow	managed	to	land	on his	 feet	 and	 kept	 running.	 As	 he	 glanced	 back	 he	 saw	 the	 monstrous	 creature bounding	towards	him	with	such	ferocity	that	it	drained	the	blood	from	his	face.

Dillon’s	heart	pounded.	The	beast	was	gaining	on	him	and	it	was	pretty	clear

that	he	might	not	make	it	to	the	other	side	in	time.	As	he	ran,	he	realized	that	the only	 way	 he	 might	 make	 it	 was	 to	 leap	 from	 the	 bridge	 and	 hope	 that	 he	 was close	enough	to	the	other	side	for	his	momentum	to	propel	him	far	enough	to	the

ledge	of	the	cliff.

Dillon	could	almost	feel	the	hot	breath	of	the	beast	on	his	back	which	made

him	 realize	 that	 it	 was	 now	 or	 never.	 He	 pumped	 his	 legs	 as	 fast	 as	 he	 could, drawing	 on	 all	 the	 resources	 his	 body	 could	 muster—pressing	 himself	 to	 the limit—trying	 to	 make	 up	 as	 much	 distance	 as	 he	 could	 before	 the	 jump.	 He glanced	 back	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 saw	 the	 creature	 reach	 out	 for	 him.	 He	 leaped with	all	his	might.

The	 Giant	 Hape	 Crusher	 lunged	 for	 him	 as	 he	 sprang	 into	 the	 air;	 its	 long stocky	 fingers	 brushing	 the	 back	 of	 the	 air-borne	 adventurer’s	 shirt.	 As	 Dillon flew	from	the	bridge	he	took	note	of	the	clump	of	vines	that	sprouted	from	the

edge	of	the	cliff.	He	knew	that	those	vines	were	the	best	shot	of	him	getting	out of	this	alive.	He	slammed	into	the	side	of	the	cliff	and	desperately	grasped	onto any	of	the	corded	plants	he	could.	As	he	hit	the	edge	of	the	cliff	he	smashed	his knee	 on	 the	 rocky	 face,	 but	 it	 barely	 phased	 him	 as	 he	 knew	 he	 had	 bigger problems	to	deal	with—like	not	falling	a	thousand	feet	to	his	death!

Thankfully	 the	 vines	 seemed	 to	 hold.	 He	 glanced	 back	 over	 his	 shoulder	 to see	the	Giant	Hape	Crusher	staring	at	him	in	disbelief.	It	howled	wildly,	not	sure of	how	to	proceed.	Luckily,	because	of	the	momentum	he	gathered	from	the	run,

Dillon	 landed	 only	 a	 few	 feet	 short	 from	 the	 top	 of	 the	 ledge.	 Quickly	 he scrambled	up	the	cliff	before	the	dumb	creature	realized	that	it	was	still	within striking	distance	of	the	kid	if	it	hurried	off	the	bridge.

The	 agile	 adventurer	 scrambled	 to	 the	 top,	 looked	 back,	 and	 smirked	 at	 the dumbfounded	creature	who	scratched	its	head	stupidly.

“See	 ya!”	 Dillon	 yelled	 as	 he	 took	 off	 again	 through	 the	 trees,	 a	 little	 bit slower	this	time	due	to	his	banged-up	knee.	The	wild	scream	that	the	Giant	Hape

Crusher	 issued	 told	 Dillon	 that	 the	 stupid	 creature	 just	 realized	 it	 could	 still chase	him,	and	was	probably	doing	just	that.

Dillon	 wound	 through	 the	 path	 once	 more	 with	 as	 much	 haste	 as	 he	 could muster,	 but	 the	 stubborn	 creature	 was	 still	 pursuing	 as	 he	 could	 hear	 the	 trees crashing	aside	as	the	beast	plowed	through.

I	 have	 to	 find	 a	 spot	 to	 hide, he	 thought	 to	 himself	 as	 he	 suddenly	 realized that	 there	 was	 no	 way	 of	 out	 running	 this	 thing;	 even	 without	 his	 banged	 up knee.	 Besides,	 Dillon	 also	 had	 to	 admit	 to	 himself	 that	 he	 was	 starting	 to	 get really	tired	and	needed	to	rest	soon.

Just	then,	as	he	stumbled	through	a	small	creek,	he	saw	what	looked	like	a

small	hole	in	the	side	of	a	hill	that	had	an	overhang	of	vines	coming	down	from

it.	Quickly	he	dashed	inside,	and	not	a	moment	too	soon!	For,	as	soon	as	he	had

touched	 the	 back	 wall	 to	 the	 small	 make-shift	 cave,	 the	 beast	 came	 bounding through	the	trees	and	into	the	creek.	It	continued	to	move	on,	about	to	step	into the	tree	line	beyond	where	Dillon	was	hiding,	when	it	suddenly	stopped.	It	lifted its	nose	into	the	air	and	sniffed	around	as	though	it	had	been	tracking	him	by	his scent	this	whole	time.

Dillon	froze,	not	even	daring	to	breathe.	He	had	his	hands	planted	against	the

back	of	the	hole	and,	as	he	was	trying	to	readjust	just	a	little	in	order	to	ensure that	he	was	fully	hidden,	his	hand	grasped	something	that	was	lodged	behind	a

root.	It	felt	small	and	smooth.	Dillon	didn’t	have	time	to	examine	it,	so	he	pulled it	out	and	quickly	placed	it	into	his	pocket.

The	 beast	 came	 back	 toward	 the	 creek	 with	 its	 nose	 in	 the	 air.	 It	 sniffed around,	 up	 and	 then	 down,	 and	 then	 it	 looked	 in	 the	 young	 adventurer’s direction.	 Its	 red	 eyes	 bored	 down	 toward	 the	 small	 hideout.	 Dillon	 could	 see through	small	openings	in	the	overhanging	vines	that	the	creature	probably	knew

he	was	there.	Slowly	it	stalked	over	as	it	continued	to	sniff.	It	was	made	starkly clear	at	that	moment	that	there	was	no	way	out	of	this	except	to	fight,	no	matter how	futile	that	might	be.	He	quickly	slid	his	finely	crafted	sabre	from	its	sheath as	 the	 creature	 approached.	 When	 it	 was	 about	 ten	 feet	 away	 Dillon	 stepped slowly	 and	 calmly	 from	 his	 would-be	 hideout.	 The	 two	 locked	 eyes	 and	 the creature	 hunched	 down	 and	 snarled,	 ready	 to	 charge.	 Dillon	 positioned	 himself in	the	best	defensive	stance	he	could	and	awaited	the	rush.

The	 Giant	 Hape	 Crusher	 roared	 one	 last	 time	 and	 then	 lunged!	 The	 agile warrior	 came	 up	 with	 the	 sabre	 leading	 and	 then	 …	 off	 in	 the	 distance	 Dillon heard	 a	 distinctive	 call,	 “Dillon!	 It’s	 time	 for	 dinner!”	 The	 call	 was	 faint,	 but brought	the	young	boy	back	to	reality.	The	beast	was	almost	upon	him.	It	closed

in	 and	 then	 …	 Dillon	 felt	 the	 lick	 of	 its	 floppy	 tongue	 on	 his	 face.	 It	 knocked him	down	as	it	playfully	licked	him	all	over.

“Okay	 okay!”	 Dillon	 said	 to	 his	 dog,	 Bruno.	 “You	 got	 me!	 Ah!	 The	 fierce Giant	Hape	Crusher	has	triumphed!”	Dillon	laughed	as	he	pushed	his	dog	away.

Bruno	growled	playfully	and	issued	a	bark	as	he	pushed	him	off.	“Sorry	boy,

but	it’s	time	for	dinner.	Let’s	go!”

Bruno	 bounded	 after	 the	 young	 adventurer	 as	 he	 led	 the	 way	 back	 through the	 small	 forest	 and	 onto	 Glenview	 street.	 Dillon’s	 house	 was	 literally	 right across	 the	 road	 from	 this	 most	 awesome	 “play	 zone”	 as	 he	 always	 called	 it.

Unfortunately,	there	weren’t	many	other	kids	in	the	neighbourhood	who	found	it

as	enjoyable	as	he	did.	But	that	was	okay.	Dillon	was	content	as	he	always	had

Bruno	 to	 play	 the	 other	 roles	 in	 their	 adventures.	 Sometimes	 he	 actually pretended	that	Bruno	was	a	giant	wolf	that	he	saved	in	one	way	or	other,	and	that he	 was	 bound	 to	 serve	 and	 protect	 him	 as	 they	 hunted	 for	 treasure	 and	 lost artifacts.

As	 he	 walked	 toward	 his	 house	 he	 pulled	 the	 object	 he	 had	 found	 from	 his pocket.	He	held	it	up	in	front	of	him	and	turned	it	over	in	his	hand.	It	looked	like

it	was	a	small	pocket	watch. Cool!	he	thought,	as	he	examined	it.	It	was	really tarnished	 and	 dirty,	 and	 the	 chain	 that	 was	 supposed	 to	 be	 attached	 to	 it	 was missing.	It	had	a	few	dings	on	it	and	when	he	pushed	the	button	in	order	to	open it	he	had	to	pry	it	a	bit	before	it	unlatched.	The	inside	was	plain,	the	face	of	the watch	was	faded,	and	the	hands	were	missing.

“What’s	 goin	 on	 today	 little	 man?”	 Mom	 asked,	 as	 he	 walk	 into	 the

driveway,	breaking	him	from	his	thoughts	of	curiosity	concerning	the	watch.

“Come	on	Mom!	I’m	taller	than	you	now!”	Dillon	complained	as	he	closed

up	the	watch	and	placed	it	back	in	his	pocket.

Mom	 just	 smiled	 her	 soft,	 almost	 mischievous	 smile,	 she	 always	 had	 when she	was	trying	to	get	a	rise	out	of	one	of	her	kids.

Dillon	shrugged	it	off	and	offered	a	smile	back	of	his	own.	“Nothing	much,”

he	 responded.	 “You	 know	 …	 just	 hunting	 for	 the	 lost	 fortress	 of	 The	 Ancient Skull,”	he	finished	with	an	expressive	flourish	of	his	hands.

“That’s	 nice,”	 Mom	 responded	 without	 missing	 a	 beat	 or	 thinking	 anything was	weird	about	his	statement.	“Don’t	forget	to	wash	your	hands	for	dinner.”

“Really	mom!	I’m	twelve	you	know!”

“Sorry,	honey.	You	still	have	to	wash	your	hands.”

“No	problem,”	Dillon	responded	with	a	shrug.

As	 Dillon	 headed	 to	 the	 bathroom	 to	 wash	 up	 for	 dinner	 his	 little	 sister, Gwen,	 raced	 up	 to	 him	 and	 wrapped	 her	 arms	 around	 his	 waist.	 “Hey	 Dragon Breath!	What’s	that	for?”	he	asked.

“I	 just	 missed	 hanging	 out	 with	 you	 and	 being	 part	 of	 your	 crazy adventures!”	 she	 said,	 a	 huge	 smile	 cresting	 her	 bright	 face.	 “Can	 we	 play	 one after	dinner?”

“I	don’t	know	…	I	am	pretty	busy	with	homework.”

Her	lips	quivered	as	she	gave	Dillon	a	sad	look.

He	smiled	back.	“Okay,	maybe	just	for	a	bit.”

Gwen	 gave	 him	 another	 huge	 hug	 and	 jumped	 back	 excitedly.	 “Maybe	 we

can	finish	finding	the	mysterious	treasure	of	woe?”

“Is	 that	 what	 we	 called	 it?”	 he	 asked.	 “We’ve	 gotta	 think	 up	 a	 better	 name than	that!”



Gwen’s	 smile	 seemed	 almost	 permanent	 at	 this	 point.	 “Did	 you	 find	 any treasures?”	she	asked.

“Not	much.	Just	this	old	pocket	watch	and	a	five	dollar	bill,”	he	said	as	he

pulled	the	money	from	his	pocket.

Gwen	looked	at	the	money	with	admiration.	“Not	much?	That’s	great!”

“Well,	if	you	like	it	so	much	then	how	about	you	keep	the	five	dollars.”

Gwen	almost	fell	over.	“Don’t	you	want	it?”	she	asked.

“No,	I	would	rather	have	this	old	watch.	I	imagine	it	used	to	be	the	property

of	 someone	 important	 long	 ago.	 It	 might	 even	 have	 a	 hidden	 map,	 or	 a	 clue	 to even	greater	treasure	stuck	inside	somewhere.

“Wow,”	Gwen	mouthed	as	she	stared	at	the	prize.

“Or	maybe	it’s	just	an	old	watch,”	Dillon	said,	shrugging.	“But	let’s	pretend

it	is	the	holder	of	a	map,”	he	ended	with	a	grin.

Gwen	nodded	her	head	eagerly.	“You	always	find	the	coolest	stuff,”	she	said

with	abounding	admiration.	“How	come?”

“I	 don't	 know.	 Just	 lucky	 I	 guess.”	 Dillon	 looked	 down	 at	 the	 watch	 and turned	 it	 over	 in	 his	 hand.	 He	 didn’t	 understand	 it,	 but	 he	 just	 had	 this	 feeling that	this	watch	 was	 important	somehow.	He	just	didn’t	know	why.	He	looked	up and	 smiled	 at	 Gwen	 and	 shrugged	 before	 moving	 passed	 her.	 Maybe	 his

imagination	was	getting	the	best	of	him,	he	thought,	as	he	chuckled	to	himself.

JAKE	WATCHED	 DEREK	 WALK	 BACK	 TO	 THEIR	 CAR	 AS	 HE	 ROUNDED	 THE	 CORNER.

His	leg	jiggled	a	little	with	nerves.	If	he	was	wrong	about	the	kid	…	He	took	a

deep	 breath	 and	 composed	 his	 face.	 Just	 in	 case	 this	 was	 the	 right	 kid,	 Jake purposely	 parked	 around	 the	 corner,	 out	 of	 the	 way	 of	 the	 view	 of	 Dillon’s house.	 He	 didn’t	 want	 any	 possibility	 of	 Dillon	 observing	 them	 and	 blowing their	 cover.	 It	 seemed	 silly	 on	 a	 rational	 level,	 but	 he	 knew	 he	 wasn’t	 dealing with	rationality	here	if	Dillon	was	their	boy.

“Well?”	 he	 asked	 as	 Derek	 settled	 in	 the	 passenger’s	 seat.	 “How	 did	 it	 go?

Did	he	see	you?”



“No	he	didn’t	see	me,”	Derek	responded.	“I	made	sure	of	that.	I	have	to	tell

you	though,	I	was	pretty	skeptical	about	your	assessment	of	this	kid.	But	it	went better	 than	 I	 thought	 it	 would.”	 He	 took	 his	 ball	 cap	 off	 to	 reveal	 a	 cleanly shaven	 head;	 right	 to	 the	 scalp.	 On	 the	 right	 side	 of	 his	 head	 he	 had	 Japanese Kana	 characters	 tattooed,	 but	 never	 told	 anyone	 what	 they	 meant.	 Whenever anyone	 asked	 him	 about	 it	 he	 just	 got	 quiet	 and	 either	 changed	 the	 subject	 or walked	away.

“That’s	encouraging	news,”	Jake	replied	with	a	smile.	“What	happened?”

“Well	…	when	you	told	me	that	you	thought	this	kid	had	some	sort	of	 luck	in finding	 objects	 that	 others	 would	 pass	 by,	 even	 if	 they	 were	 well	 hidden	 I thought	 you	 were	 exaggerating,”	 Derek	 said.	 “So	 I	 decided	 to	 test	 your	 little theory	and	I	hid	it	in	a	place	that	no	one	should	have	found	it.”

“Where?”	asked	Jake,	intrigued.

Derek,	 looking	 down	 at	 his	 cap,	 paused	 for	 a	 moment,	 then	 looked	 up	 and met	Jake’s	waiting	gaze.	“I	hid	the	watch	in	a	natural	alcove	that	had	some	tree roots	 growing	 down	 over	 the	 hole.	 In	 the	 alcove	 I	 buried	 it	 behind	 some	 more roots	and	moss.	That	thing	should	have	stayed	hidden	for	ever.”

Jake	smiled.	“I	think	we’ve	found	our	kid,”	he	said	as	he	reached	over	and

turned	the	key	in	the	ignition.

DILLON	LAY	 IN	 HIS	 BED	 LATER	 THAT	 NIGHT	 STARING	 UP	 AT	 THE	 STRANGE	 WATCH

he	 had	 found.	 It	 didn’t	 work	 anymore.	 He	 rubbed	 at	 it	 with	 the	 sleeve	 of	 his pyjama	shirt,	trying	to	clean	the	dirt	and	stains	off	of	it.	As	he	rubbed	he	noticed that	there	was	some	sort	of	writing	on	the	back.	He	reached	over	and	pulled	his

night	lamp	closer	so	he	could	get	a	better	look	at	it.	It	was	really	hard	to	read, but,	 after	 a	 few	 moments	 he	 managed	 to	 make	 out	 the	 letters	 JTS. JTS	 he mouthed	 silently.	 He	 opened	 the	 watch	 up	 again	 and	 turned	 it	 around	 in	 his hands	a	few	more	times,	looking	for	anything	else	he	could	see	that	was	out	of

the	 ordinary.	 The	 fact	 that	 the	 hands	 were	 missing	 was	 definitely	 strange.	 He considered	 the	 letters	 for	 a	 few	 moments	 more.	 Dillon	 was	 sure	 that,	 if	 this

watch	could	talk,	it	would	have	a	tale	to	tell	that	would	make	his	own	adventures seem	lame	in	comparison!	His	mind	drifted	to	fantastical	imaginations	of	far	off lands	and	amazing	feats	of	heroism.	He	laughed	to	himself.

Sure, he	thought. It	was	probably	just	some	old	man’s	junk	that	he	threw	out when	he	couldn’t	find	any	replacement	hands!

Still,	he	couldn’t	help	but	wonder	if	there	was	something	more.	He	couldn’t

explain	it	but	he	just	had	this	feeling	about	this	watch.

He	 suddenly	 heard	 footsteps	 coming	 down	 the	 hall	 towards	 his	 room.

Quickly,	he	put	the	watch	down,	shut	off	the	lights,	and	tucked	himself	under	the covers,	narrowly	avoiding	the	“mom	talk”	about	going	to	sleep	promptly.

As	 he	 drifted	 off	 to	 sleep	 he	 smiled	 to	 himself	 as	 his	 mind	 started	 working out	all	the	possible	origins	of	the	watch,	a	few	of	those	thoughts	even	followed him	into	his	dreams.





3

C H O C O L A T E

Dillon	and	his	friends	walked	onto	the	playground	with	confidence	and

expectation.	They	had	thirty	minutes	left	in	their	lunch	break	in	order

to	continue	their	adventures	of	the	high	seas.	As	they	climbed	onto	the

Jungle	Gym	it	transformed	in	their	minds	into	a	huge	wooden	ship	that	swayed

back	 and	 forth,	 being	 tossed	 to	 and	 fro	 by	 the	 pounding	 of	 the	 swells	 of	 the ocean.

The	boat	threatened	to	come	apart	as	it	was	hammered	by	the	roaring	waves.

The	crew	might	have	felt	better	about	their	circumstances	if	they	weren’t	being

boarded	by	pirates!	They	were	warned	that	this	part	of	the	sea	was	full	of	them, but	the	chance	to	be	the	ones	who	found	the	lost	isle	of	the	Dawn	Breaker	was

too	much	temptation	for	the	crew	of	six.	Their	Captain,	Colton	Drake,	was	sure

they	 could	 make	 it	 despite	 the	 warnings	 that	 were	 given	 to	 them	 before	 they embarked.

The	pirates	came	on	in	a	fury.	First	mate,	Chet	Williams,	narrowly	dodged	a

wicked	looking	jagged	pirate	blade	before	coming	back	with	a	strike	of	his	own.

He	scored	a	hit	on	the	pirate’s	side;	the	sea	dog	grimaced	and	fell	back	a	step.

Williams	smiled	slightly,	then	his	look	turned	to	surprise	as	the	pirate	returned	to the	battle	with	the	same	fury	as	the	storm	that	rocked	the	boat.

Williams	worked	his	blade	feverishly,	matching	blow	with	parry,	parry	with

blow;	neither	scoring	a	hit.	The	ring	of	their	blades	was	heard	above	that	of	the roar	of	the	storm.	The	pirate	pushed	Williams	back	to	the	side	of	the	ship	with



his	 ferocity.	 Their	 blades	 locked	 and	 Williams	 could	 smell	 the	 stench	 of	 the pirate’s	 breath	 as	 he	 moved	 in	 close,	 hoping	 to	 overpower	 the	 sailor.	 Williams thought	he	was	about	to	perish	when	suddenly	the	pirate’s	eyes	opened	wide	in

disbelief	and	his	press	upon	Williams	slackened	just	before	he	fell	to	the	deck.	In the	dark	night	Williams	could	see	the	face	of	his	Captain	standing	there.

“You	alright?”	Captain	Drake	asked.

Williams	 nodded.	 He	 and	 Drake	 looked	 around,	 then	 leaped	 back	 into	 the fray	 in	 order	 to	 help	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 crew.	 As	 he	 fought	 off	 the	 pirates,	 Captain Drake	 would	 take	 any	 reprieve	 he	 could	 to	 glance	 at	 his	 compass	 in	 order	 to make	sure	that	the	ship	was	still	on	course,	despite	the	battle.

“CHECK	 THIS	 OUT	 GUYS,”	 SAID	 JASON,	 A	 STALKY	 SIXTH	 GRADER,	 TO	 HIS	 FOUR

friends	 who	 were	 just	 hanging	 out	 by	 the	 school	 fence	 talking	 about	 the	 latest you-tuber	as	they	ate	lunch.

They	all	turned	and	watched	as	they	saw	Dillon	and	five	younger	grade	kids

jumping	 all	 over	 the	 Jungle	 Gym,	 pretending	 to	 dodge	 blows	 and	 battle	 some unseen	foes.	The	guys	started	chuckling.

“Man,	is	that	kid	ever	weird,”	said	one	of	Jason’s	friends.

“Ya	…	no	doubt,”	Jason	replied	as	he	started	walking	toward	the	playground.

“What	are	you	doin	man?”	asked	another	of	his	friends.

Jason	turned	to	regard	him	and	smiled.	“I’m	just	gonna	have	some	fun,”	he

responded.

There	were	other	kids	watching	the	display	from	a	distance	but	didn’t	seem

to	mind.	From	time-to-time	another	smaller	kid	or	two	would	come	up	and	start

playing	 with	 the	 crew.	 Dillon	 welcomed	 anyone	 who	 wanted	 to	 engage	 in	 the adventure.

He	 noticed	 Jason	 and	 his	 gang	 approaching	 but	 continued	 the	 adventure

anyway,	knowing	that	it	was	probably	about	to	come	to	an	end.

Sure	enough.	As	Jason	walked	up	he	pushed	one	of	the	younger	kids	out	of

the	way.	The	kid	sprawled	out	onto	the	grass	and	rolled	a	couple	of	times	before

coming	to	a	stop.	Immediately	Dillon	jumped	off	the	equipment	and	met	Jason face-to-face.

“Hey	 man!	 Why	 don’t	 you	 leave	 us	 alone,”	 he	 said,	 getting	 between	 Jason and	the	rest	of	his	“crew.”

“I	just	thought	you	might	want	some	 real	people	to	fight,”	Jason	said	with	a sneer.

“No,	we’re	okay	with	the	pirates	of	the	Glass	Sea,”	responded	Dillon.

“The	what?”	Jason	asked	incredulously.

“The	 pirates	 of	 the	 Glass	 Sea,”	 Dillon	 said	 matter-of-factly.	 “Don’t	 tell	 me you’ve	 never	 heard	 of	 them?	 They’re	 infamous	 for	 their	 murderous	 rage.	 They seek	vessels	to	attack	and	pillage,	murdering	all	in	their	way	and	hoarding	all	the treasure	they	acquire.”

“You’re	weird	man,”	stated	Jason,	a	tone	of	condescension	in	his	voice.

“I	 know.	 It	 is	 strange	 that	 we	 use	 our	 imaginations	 to	 entertain	 ourselves.

You’ve	heard	of	that?	Haven’t	you?”

“Of	course	I	have	you	nerd!”	exclaimed	Jason	indignantly.

“Then	maybe	you	would	like	to	join	us?”	offered	Dillon.

Jason	shook	his	head	slightly,	unable	to	mask	the	disgust	he	had	on	his	face.

“Man,	 I	 could	 beat	 the	 crap	 out	 of	 you	 if	 I	 wanted.	 But	 you’re	 not	 worth	 my time.	 This	 thing,	 though?”	 he	 said	 as	 he	 noticed	 the	 watch	 in	 Dillon’s	 hand.

Quickly,	 before	 Dillon	 could	 react,	 he	 snatched	 it	 from	 him.	 “What’s	 this?”	 he asked	in	a	taunting	voice.

“Hey	man,	not	cool!”	Dillon	responded.	“That’s	mine!”

“Hunt,	your	family’s	so	poor	your	parents	can’t	even	afford	a	proper	watch

for	you!,”	Jason	exclaimed	as	he	held	it	up.	Dillon	tried	to	grab	it	back,	but	Jason quickly	 pulled	 it	 away	 and	 shoved	 Dillon	 hard	 in	 the	 chest.	 Dillon	 stumbled back,	but	was	able	to	maintain	his	footing.

Jason’s	crew	was	quick	to	look	around	and	see	if	any	of	the	recess	monitors

had	 noticed	 what	 was	 going	 on.	 They	 hadn’t.	 Fortunately	 for	 Jason	 the playground	was	packed	and	the	monitors	were	all	preoccupied:	some	with	other

kids;	 some	 talking	 to	 one	 another;	 and	 one	 monitor,	 Mrs	 Jacobs,	 apparently thought	there	were	more	interesting	things	going	on	in	the	world	of	social	media

as	she	had	her	face	glued	to	her	phone.

“It	looks	worthless,”	said	Jason.	“Let’s	see	if	it	is.”

Before	Dillon	could	try	and	grab	at	it	again	Jason	threw	it	as	hard	as	he	could

behind	 the	 playground	 and	 into	 …	 Miss	 Kettle’s	 yard!	 Dillon,	 and	 all	 the	 kids who	had	witnessed	this,	were	horror	struck.

Miss	Kettle’s	yard	backed	onto	the	school	property	and	all	the	kids	avoided

her	 part	 of	 the	 fence	 like	 the	 plague.	 This	 was	 due	 to	 her	 dog,	 Chocolate.	 The name	she	gave	her	dog	didn’t	seem	to	match	the	dog	itself	except	for	maybe	its

color.	Chocolate	was	a	massive	Rottweiler-Husky	cross	with	dark	brown	fur.	His

bark	 was	 enough	 to	 scare	 the	 bravest	 of	 the	 kids	 at	 school.	 He	 didn’t	 show himself	very	often,	but	when	someone	ventured	too	close	to	the	fence	he	would,

most-times,	 let	 out	 a	 deep-throated	 bark	 that	 seemed	 to	 shake	 the	 very	 air.	 The worst	part	was	that	Miss	Kettle’s	yard	was	 full	of	trees,	plants,	and	shrubs	which made	it	perfect	for	Chocolate	to	conceal	himself	so	you	wouldn’t	know	he	was

even	there	until	it	was	too	late.

Dillon	 stood	 there	 in	 a	 daze.	 In	 an	 instant	 it	 seemed	 like	 the	 entire playground	 went	 silent.	 You	 could	 hear	 a	 pin	 drop	 at	 that	 moment.	 The	 slight breeze,	which	before	now	was	not	even	noticeable,	seemed	like	a	torrent	at	that

moment.

“You	 jerk!”	 screamed	 Sarah—another	 sixth	 grader	 with	 medium	 length

brown	hair,	and	one	of	Dillon’s	best	friends—as	she	moved	closer	to	Jason	and

Dillon.

Jason	merely	laughed.

Dillon	started	walking	toward	the	yard.

“What	 are	 you	 doing?”	 asked	 Sarah	 as	 she	 grabbed	 his	 arm.	 “You’re	 not seriously	thinking	about	going	in	there	are	you?”	she	pressed.

Dillon	pulled	his	arm	away.	“I	have	to,”	he	said	as	he	turned	to	look	her	in

the	eyes.

“Why?”

“I	 …	 I	 don’t	 know,”	 he	 responded	 hesitantly.	 “But	 I	 need	 to	 get	 that	 watch back.”

“Why	don’t	you	just	wait	until	after	school	and	go	ask	Miss	Kettle	to	get	it

back	for	you	instead	of	risking	your	life	for	a	stupid	broken	watch	you	found	in the	forest?”	Sarah	reasoned.

“I	 can’t	 wait.	 I	 can’t	 lose	 it.	 What	 if	 the	 dog	 get’s	 it	 first?”	 His	 voice	 was verging	 on	 the	 edge	 of	 desperation.	 His	 tone	 stopped	 Sarah	 in	 her	 tracks	 for	 a moment.

Jason	laughed	again	as	he	began	to	walk	away.	“You’re	as	stupid	as	you	look

Hunt!”

Sarah	 snapped	 her	 head	 around	 and	 gave	 Jason	 a	 cold	 look.	 He	 sneered	 at her,	 waved	 his	 hand	 dismissively,	 and	 continued	 walking.	 “Come	 on	 guys,”	 he said	 to	 the	 rest	 of	 his	 posse.	 They	 hesitated,	 unsure	 of	 what	 they	 should	 do.	 “I said	come	on!”	he	reiterated	forcefully.	That	was	enough	to	get	them	going.

By	the	time	Sarah	looked	back,	Dillon	was	halfway	to	the	fence.	The	other

kids	 who,	 a	 moment	 earlier	 were	 hanging	 out	 with	 him	 on	 the	 Jungle	 Gym, looked	to	one	another	for	a	second	and	then	began	to	follow.	Sarah	ran	to	catch

up	with	him.

“Dillon!”	she	whispered	emphatically	as	they	got	closer	to	the	fence.

Dillon	 quickly	 waved	 his	 hand	 in	 a	 downward	 motion	 indicating	 that	 he wanted	 her	 to	 be	 quiet.	 He	 stood	 by	 the	 fence	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 listened.

Everyone	 was	 deadly	 silent.	 The	 only	 sound	 that	 could	 be	 heard	 was	 the	 light breeze	that	moved	through	the	trees	and	brush	of	Miss	Kettle’s	yard,	ruffling	the leaves	and	branches	as	it	went.

Dillon	grabbed	the	top	of	the	chain-linked	fence.	Sarah	touched	his	shoulder.

He	 turned	 and	 met	 her	 eyes,	 noting	 the	 concern	 he	 could	 see	 in	 them.	 “It’ll	 be okay,”	he	whispered	to	her.	With	that,	he	quickly	leaped	over	the	fence	and	into the	yard.	Every	kid	watching	held	their	breath,	not	daring	to	make	a	sound.

Dillon	made	his	way	quickly	across	the	small	clearing	that	led	to	the	edge	of

the	trees	and	bushes	which	covered	Miss	Kettle’s	yard.	He	then	crouched	down

and	 slipped	 under	 the	 closest	 overhang	 of	 branches	 and	 disappeared	 under	 the overgrowth.	 As	 silent	 as	 he	 could	 he	 maneuvered	 through	 the	 yard,	 trying	 to remember	roughly	where	he	saw	the	watch	go	down.	As	he	snuck	along	he	was

careful	 to	 listen	 for	 any	 sound	 that	 Chocolate	 might	 make.	 He	 noted	 some deadfall	 under	 the	 trees	 and	 picked	 up	 a	 one	 inch	 thick	 branch	 that	 was	 about

three	feet	long,	just	in	case.	He	came	through	the	thick	brush	and	noted	a	large doghouse	in	front	of	him	and	to	the	right.	He	scanned	the	yard	to	see	if	he	could spot	 the	 dog	 anywhere.	 All	 was	 clear.	 As	 he	 was	 repositioning	 himself	 he suddenly	heard	some	movement	coming	from	within	the	doghouse.	He	froze,	not

daring	 to	 even	 breathe.	 He	 waited	 for	 what	 seemed	 an	 eternity,	 but	 nothing happened.	No	dog. He’s	probably	sleeping,	Dillon	thought. I	hope	he’s	sleeping!

As	 he	 continued	 to	 scan	 around	 he	 noted	 the	 glint	 of	 an	 object	 as	 the	 sun reflected	off	of	it.	It	was	the	watch!	Dillon’s	best	guess	was	that	the	watch	had cleared	 the	 trees	 and	 landed	 about	 ten	 feet	 from	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 brush	 into	 the yard;	five	feet	from	the	entrance	to	the	doghouse.

Man.	 Jason	 has	 a	 great	 arm! he	 thought	 to	 himself. That	 kid	 should	 really focus	 on	 using	 it	 for	 good	 not	 evil. Dillon	 shook	 his	 head	 in	 order	 to	 focus	 his attention	back	to	the	task	at	hand. Get	the	watch, he	thought	to	himself. Get	 the watch.

He	kneeled	at	the	edge	of	the	tree-line,	reached	down	and	grabbed	a	handful

of	 dead	 leaves,	 and	 sprinkled	 them	 lightly	 so	 that	 he	 could	 get	 a	 sense	 of	 the wind	direction.	The	wind	was	blowing	back	the	way	he	had	come,	which	meant

that	it	was	blowing,	more-or-less,	away	from	the	doghouse.

Dillon	 knew	 that	 he	 had	 to	 act	 sooner	 than	 later.	 Slowly	 he	 began	 to	 creep toward	the	watch,	walking	in	a	crouched	position,	watching	carefully	where	he

placed	 each	 foot	 as	 he	 moved.	 He	 was	 almost	 there	 when	 he	 noticed	 a	 slight change	in	his	environment.	He	felt	the	wind	shift	ever-so-slightly	as	the	hair	on the	back	of	his	head	moved	in	that	direction;	the	direction	of	the	doghouse.	His heart	started	to	pound,	threatening	to	burst	from	his	chest.	Then	he	heard	it.	The low	 growl	 that	 drained	 the	 blood	 from	 his	 face.	 Slowly,	 he	 looked	 up	 to	 see Chocolate	 crouched	 low	 in	 his	 doghouse	 and	 starring	 at	 him	 with	 those	 deep brown	eyes,	barring	his	shiny	white	teeth.

Dillon’s	 hand	 was	 so	 close	 to	 the	 watch.	 A	 few	 more	 inches	 and	 he	 would have	 it.	 Chocolate	 slowly	 started	 to	 emerge	 from	 the	 doghouse.	 Dillon	 grasped the	stick	tightly	in	his	hand	while	he	moved	his	other	hand	over	and	grabbed	the watch.	 Chocolate’s	 growl	 grew	 more	 intense.	 Slowly,	 Dillon	 began	 to	 stand.

“Hey	boy,”	he	said	in	a	steady	tone.	“How	are	you	today?”	Chocolate	barked.

“Easy	boy,”	said	Dillon	with	his	hand	out.	“You	want	the	stick?”	he	asked	as he	began	to	wave	it.	Chocolate	still	growled	and	issued	a	bark.	Dillon	waved	the stick	a	little	more	emphatically.	“Wanna	play?	Come	on	boy	…	come	on	…”	he

said	in	the	most	playful	voice	he	could	muster.

Dillon	started	to	back	away	slowly.	He	didn’t	think	the	dog	was	going	for	it.

He	 still	 waved	 the	 stick	 and	 tried	 to	 get	 Chocolate’s	 attention	 with	 it.	 The	 dog crouched	 lower	 and	 began	 to	 stalk	 in.	 Dillon	 now	 knew	 that	 he	 had	 but	 one option:	 run.	 Before	 he	 was	 able	 to	 turn,	 Chocolate	 leaped	 at	 him,	 his	 canine fangs	leading	the	way.	Dillon	twisted	and	turned	around	the	nearest	tree;	the	dog landed	with	a	thud,	tearing	at	the	bark	where	Dillon	was	just	a	moment	earlier.

The	 young	 boy	 pumped	 his	 legs	 as	 fast	 as	 he	 could,	 knowing	 that	 the ferocious	 dog	 was	 coming	 at	 him	 without	 mercy.	 He	 could	 hear	 the	 dog	 break around	the	tree	in	pursuit	but	he	didn’t	dare	to	even	turn	his	head	and	look.	His only	hope,	he	knew,	was	to	get	to	the	fence.

Chocolate	tore	through	the	brush	like	a	dog	possessed!	He	was	almost	on	top

of	Dillon	when	his	name	rang	through	the	air	as	a	large	stick	land	right	near	him.

Chocolate	 stopped	 to	 take	 note.	 “Over	 here	 Chocolate!”	 yelled	 Sarah	 again, standing	about	fifteen	feet	from	him.

Dillon	 glanced	 over	 to	 see	 his	 friend	 standing	 there	 and	 noted	 that	 she	 had just	 bought	 him	 some	 time.	 Sarah	 ran	 as	 soon	 as	 the	 dog	 noticed	 her.	 It	 was confused	for	a	moment	as	it	stared	between	the	two,	as	if	wondering	which	one

would	make	a	juicier	snack.	It	decided	to	keep	going	for	Dillon	as	it	again	turned toward	him	and	resumed	the	chase.

Dillon	 could	 see	 the	 fence	 and	 the	 others	 standing	 safely	 on	 the	 other	 side.

They	 began	 to	 cheer	 when	 they	 saw	 him	 and	 Sarah,	 then	 their	 cheer	 turned	 to shrieks	of	horror	as	they	saw	Chocolate	in	hot	pursuit	coming	through	the	small

clearing	that	led	to	the	fence.

Dillon	knew	he	was	going	to	be	hard-pressed	to	make	it	so	he	turned	to	meet

the	 charging	 dog	 and	 got	 his	 stick	 up	 just	 in	 time.	 Chocolate	 bit	 down	 on	 the branch	and	began	to	tear	it	back	and	forth.	It	was	all	Dillon	could	do	to	keep	the stick	in	his	hands.	He	knew	he	had	to	make	a	break	over	the	fence,	so	he	let	go

of	 the	 stick	 and	 twisted	 his	 body,	 placing	 a	 hand	 on	 the	 fence	 and	 leaped.	 The

dog	tore	at	the	stick	a	little	more	then	threw	it	to	the	ground	and	lunged	toward Dillon.	The	boy	curled	up	his	legs	as	Chocolate	snapped	his	huge	maw	at	him.

The	dog	managed	to	grab	some	of	the	fabric	on	Dillon’s	pant	leg,	but	it	wasn’t

enough	to	get	a	good	hold,	and	it	tore	free.	Dillon	cleared	the	fence	and	landed on	the	ground	with	a	thud,	feeling	some	of	the	wind	being	blown	from	his	lungs.

He	lay	there	for	a	moment,	trying	to	get	his	breath	back.	When	he	managed

to	look	up	he	saw	the	faces	of	his	friends	staring	down	at	him	with	huge	smiles, cheering,	and	offering	to	help	him	up.

Dillon	quickly	sat	up	onto	his	elbows	then	glance	over	to	Sarah	who	was	just

getting	up	from	where	she	was	kneeling	after	jumping	the	fence.	Chocolate	was

barking	as	ferociously	as	he	could	and	ramming	his	head	into	the	fence.

“That	was	awesome!”	yelled	Tyler	Jones,	a	scrawny	ten	year	old	who	always

loved	 hanging	 out	 with	 Dillon	 on	 the	 playground	 and	 being	 part	 of	 his adventures.	The	others	agreed	enthusiastically.

Dillon	nodded	and	shook	off	the	loose	grass	that	clung	to	his	clothes.	Sarah

marched	 over	 and	 punched	 him	 in	 the	 arm	 as	 hard	 as	 she	 could.	 “Ow!”	 he complained.	“What	was	that	for?”

“Oh	I	think	you	know!”	she	replied.	“You	know	…	you	know	…	you	know!”

she	yelled.	“That	was	the	stupidest	thing	you	have	ever	done!”

Dillon	was	quiet,	and	so	were	the	rest	of	the	kids.	In	fact,	the	silence	was	so

awkward	 that	 the	 others	 started	 to	 slink	 away	 muttering	 one	 excuse	 or	 another.

Sarah’s	 angry	 eyes	 bore	 into	 him.	 From	 his	 pocket	 Dillon	 produced	 the	 watch and	smiled.

“Was	 it	 worth	 it?”	 Sarah	 asked,	 her	 anger	 not	 abated	 at	 all.	 “Is	 that	 worth your	life?”	she	yelled,	pointing	an	angry	finger	at	the	watch.

“I	 think	 you’re	 exaggerating	 a	 little,”	 Dillon	 responded	 as	 he	 put	 the	 watch back	in	his	pocket.	“And	yes	…	I	can’t	explain	it,	but	this	was	worth	it.”

Sarah	 looked	 at	 him	 in	 disbelief,	 snorted,	 and	 stormed	 away.	 By	 then

Chocolate	 had	 calmed	 down	 and	 slunk	 back	 into	 the	 tree-line,	 heading	 for	 his doghouse	again.

Dillon	 was	 left	 there	 by	 himself;	 the	 soft,	 cool	 wind	 brushing	 against	 his face. Why	was	this	so	important? he	thought	to	himself.	After	a	moment	more	he

merely	shrugged	the	thought	away	and	headed	toward	the	school	as	he	knew	the lunch	break	was	about	to	end.





4

D U S T 	 V A L L E Y 	 D E S E R T 	 O A S I S 	 R E S O R T

After	a	few	days,	Dillon’s	relationship	with	Sarah	was	still	broken.	She

had	refused	to	hang	out	the	last	couple	of	days,	or	even	talk	to	him	for

that	matter.	He	had	trouble	figuring	out	why	she	was	so	angry.	He	knew

he	had	to	repair	whatever	damage	had	been	done,	but	he	didn’t	quite	know	how

to	go	about	it.

After	 school	 on	 the	 third	 day	 after	 the	 incident	 in	 Miss	 Kettle’s	 yard,	 as Dillon	walked	onto	the	school	bus,	he	noticed	that	none	of	Sarah’s	other	friends had	sat	down	with	her	yet. This	is	my	chance,	he	thought	to	himself.

As	 he	 walked	 up	 to	 her	 seat	 he	 noticed	 that	 she	 was	 quick	 to	 turn	 her	 face away	from	him	and	stare	out	the	window,	pretending	not	to	see	him.	“Is	this	seat taken?”	he	asked	innocently.

She	glanced	up	at	him	with	a	blank	expression	that	he	found	hard	to	read.	“I

really	need	to	talk	to	you,”	he	was	quick	to	add,	feeling	as	though	he	was	on	the edge	of	his	chance	at	any	reconciliation.	“Please,”	he	pleaded.

“Fine,”	she	replied	in	a	cold	tone.

Dillon	 smiled	 and	 sat	 down.	 “Listen,”	 he	 started,	 “I’m	 really	 sorry	 I	 upset you	the	other	day.	It	was	stupid	of	me	and	I—”

“It’s	okay,”	Sarah	interrupted	him,	managing	a	little	smile.	“You	just	get	me

so	angry	sometimes	with	your	crazy	ideas.”

Dillon	 was	 shocked!	 He	 didn’t	 think	 it	 would	 be	 that	 easy.	 “We’re	 okay then?”	he	asked.

“Ya.	You	know	me.	I	can’t	stay	mad	at	you	forever.”

Dillon	smiled.	“Thanks!”

“So	what’s	so	special	about	that	watch	anyway?”	Sarah	asked.

Dillon	took	it	out	of	his	backpack.	“I	don’t	know,”	he	replied.	“There’s	just

something	about	it.”	He	opened	it	up	and	showed	Sarah	the	inside	with	the	faded

face	and	the	missing	hands.

She	took	it	and	looked	it	over.	“It	just	looks	like	a	piece	of	junk,”	she	stated.

She	 looked	 at	 the	 back	 and	 noticed	 the	 letters	 JTS.	 “JTS?”	 she	 asked.	 “What’s that	mean?”

“I	don’t	know.	It	could	be	anything?”

“You	said	you	found	this	in	the	forest	beside	your	house?”

“Ya.	 In	 a	 really	 weird	 spot	 too.	 I	 can’t	 for	 the	 life	 of	 me	 think	 why	 it	 was where	it	was,”	Dillon	stated.

Sarah	 handed	 the	 watch	 back.	 “Well,	 it	 is	 kind	 of	 cool	 finding	 something that’s	that	old	and	worn.”	She	smiled.	“You’ve	always	been	into	old	stuff.”

Dillon	put	the	watch	back	in	his	pack	and	smiled	at	his	friend.	He	knew	that

she	would	come	around.

He	 glanced	 out	 the	 window	 as	 he	 zipped	 up	 the	 bag	 and	 noticed	 his	 older sister	 Claire	 with	 Jeff	 Hogan,	 a	 tall	 gangly	 fourteen	 year	 old	 with	 light	 brown shaggy	hair.	He	wore	tattered	jeans	and	a	tank	top.	Claire	smiled	and	laughed	at something	Jeff	had	said	while	putting	her	hand	on	his	shoulder.	She	leaned	over

and	gave	him	a	kiss	before	turning	and	rushing	to	the	bus.

As	she	walked	down	the	aisle	Dillon	looked	up	and	gave	her	a	quick	smirk.

“What’s	that	for	nerd?”	she	asked	disdainfully.

“Nothing.	Can’t	I	smile	at	my	sister?”

Ah	…	no,”	she	replied	as	she	moved	passed	him	to	join	some	of	her	friends

who	saved	her	a	seat	near	the	back	of	the	bus.

“Wow.	She’s	rude	isn’t	she?”	Sarah	noted.

Dillon	shrugged,	not	really	caring	too	much	about	Claire’s	attitude.	“It’s	just

how	she	is.	But	now	I	know	something	that	she	doesn’t.”

“Oh	ya.	What’s	that?”

“She	 doesn’t	 know	 that	 I	 know	 she’s	 dating	 Jeff	 Hogan,”	 he	 replied	 with	 a



smile.

Sarah	 laughed	 and	 shook	 her	 head,	 always	 amused	 at	 the	 interplay	 that happens	between	Dillon	and	his	siblings.

THAT	 NIGHT	 DINNER	 WAS	 AWESOME!	 THE	 ROAST	 CHICKEN	 WAS	 PERFECTLY	 DONE

with	 the	 skin	 at	 just	 the	 right	 crispiness	 level!	 Dillon	 loved	 roast	 chicken.	 And those	 baked	 potatoes!	 Even	 the	 salad	 was	 good	 which	 was	 always	 a	 bonus, especially	 for	 someone	 who	 didn't	 like	 eating	 vegetables	 that	 much.	 There	 was even	a	rumour	that	Mom	had	made	cheesecake!

Mom	 and	 Dad	 always	 provided	 for	 the	 family,	 but	 sometimes	 the	 food

selection	 was	 limited	 due	 to	 finances.	 Special	 meals	 were	 always	 made	 to celebrate	special	occasions	and	today’s	meal	was	definitely	special,	which	made

Dillon	wonder	what	was	up.

“So	 what’s	 the	 special	 occasion?”	 Dillon	 finally	 asked,	 as	 he	 went	 in	 for another	helping	of	that	delicious	chicken.

“Nothing	 much,”	 replied	 Dad.	 “I	 just	 thought	 I	 would	 treat	 the	 family tonight.”

“Riiiiight	…	”	replied	Jordan,	Dillon’s	older	brother,	in	a	skeptical	tone.

Dad	 smiled	 back.	 “Oh	 …	 and	 I	 just	 wanted	 everyone	 to	 know	 that	 we	 just might	be	going	on	a	family	vacation	this	year	after	all.”

Dillon’s	jaw	dropped	to	the	floor!

“How	is	that	possible?”	asked	Claire.

“Well,	it	turns	out	that	I	won	some	tickets	to	Dust	Valley	Desert	Oasis	Resort

—the	 same	 place	 Aunt	 Clarissa,	 Uncle	 Gerald,	 and	 their	 kids	 went	 a	 couple years	 ago—from	 filling	 out	 an	 on-line	 survey	 for	 a	 stats-gathering	 agency.	 I don’t	 remember	 doing	 the	 survey,	 but	 it	 was	 probably	 done	 a	 while	 ago.

Everything's	been	verified	so	I	know	it’s	not	a	scam,”	Dad	explained.

“That’s	 great!	 Jordan	 exclaimed.	 “Uncle	 Gerald	 said	 that	 the	 place	 was awesome	for	hiking,	biking,	canoeing,	and	all	sorts	of	other	outdoor	activities.”

“Don’t	forget	about	the	girls,”	Gwen	said	in	a	sly	tone.

Jordan’s	face	turned	red.	“Oh,	shut	up!”	he	snapped	back.

“Jordan!	Don’t	use	that	language!”	Mom	interjected.

Jordan	 slumped	 back	 in	 his	 chair,	 clearly	 not	 happy	 about	 his	 little	 sister’s observation	while	Claire	and	Gwen	chuckled	to	themselves.

“So	 when	 are	 we	 planning	 to	 go?”	 asked	 Dillon.	 “Summer	 time	 is	 just

around	the	corner.”

“Really!”	 Claire	 stated	 in	 a	 snotty	 tone.	 “We’re	 barely	 halfway	 through spring	 and	 you	 think	 Summer	 is	 ‘right	 around	 the	 corner,’”	 she	 ended	 as	 she made	the	air-quote	sign	with	her	fingers.

“What?”	 Dillon	 shrugged	 innocently.	 “To	 me	 that	 is	 ‘right	 around	 the

corner,’”	he	air-quoted	back.	In	truth,	however,	Dillon	didn’t	know	how	he	was

going	to	handle	the	wait.	He	was	one	of	the	worst	ones	in	the	family	for	having

patience	right	before	a	big	family	trip.	He	knew	he	would	have	to	find	something to	keep	his	mind	off	of	it.

Dad	 just	 shook	 his	 head	 and	 snickered	 at	 his	 children’s	 banter.	 “Well,”	 he started,	 after	 Dillon	 and	 Claire	 had	 quieted,	 “the	 tickets	 are	 really	 specific	 in regard	 to	 the	 timing.	 Fortunately,	 my	 boss	 already	 gave	 me	 those	 days	 off	 in order	for	us	to	take	the	vacation,”	Dad	explained.

“And	that	day	is	…	?”	Claire	prodded.

“It	just	happens	to	be	July	sixth	to	the	seventeenth.”

“That’s	awesome!”	Dillon	exclaimed.	“That’s	right	after	Independence	Day!

So	we	get	to	enjoy	that	weekend	with	our	friends	and	then	we’re	off	for	a	wicked family	vacation!”

Mom	 smiled	 at	 his	 exuberant	 display	 as	 she	 scooped	 a	 little	 bit	 more	 salad onto	Gwen’s	plate.	Gwen	frowned	at	Mom.

“Sorry	 guys,	 but	 I	 need	 to	 ask	 the	 obvious	 question.	 How	 are	 we	 going	 to afford	the	spending	money?”	Claire	reasoned.

Mom	and	Dad	shared	knowing	looks	and	grinned	at	one	another.

“That’s	 the	 best	 part,”	 Dad	 said.	 “The	 resort	 is	 all-inclusive	 and	 the	 tickets come	with	a	two	thousand	dollar	voucher	that	can	be	used	for	any	activities	or

merchandise	on	the	property.”

“What!”	 Jordan	 yelled,	 not	 able	 to	 contain	 his	 excitement.	 “It	 sounds	 too



good	to	be	true.”

“Always	 the	 skeptic,”	 Mom	 said,	 as	 she	 gave	 Jordan	 that	 motherly	 look which	reproved	the	kids	from	time	to	time.

“Well	I	think	it’s	awesome!”	Gwen	responded	with	a	massive	grin.

“It	is	awesome,”	Dad	replied.	“And	much	needed	for	our	family.”

With	that,	the	Hunt	family	continued	to	chatter	away	about	the	prospects	for

fun	and	relaxation	that	this	vacation	was	going	to	bring	for	their	family.

Dillon’s	 mind	 was	 transported	 far	 away	 as	 he	 began	 to	 imagine	 the	 great adventures	he	was	about	to	have	at	the	Dust	Valley	Desert	Oasis	Resort.	It	was

going	to	be	a	time	to	remember.	More	so	than	he	even	realized.

DILLON	 LOOKED	 AT	 THE	 WATCH.	 HE	 HELD	 IT	 OPEN	 IN	 HIS	 HAND.	 EVERYTHING

around	him	was	dark.	The	only	thing	he	could	see	was	the	watch.	It	had	a	single

hand	attached	to	it	which	was	spinning	clockwise.	It	spun	and	spun	and	spun—

faster	and	faster	and	faster.	He	began	to	get	mesmerized	by	the	spinning	action

when	suddenly	he	was	ripped	from	his	daze	by	a	loud	hiss.

He	 whipped	 around	 and	 lurched	 backwards	 as	 a	 large	 snake	 head	 lunged

toward	him,	fangs	bared.	He	stumbled	and	threw	his	hands	up	as	the	thing	came

in.

Dillon	 opened	 his	 eyes,	 gasping	 for	 breath!	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 ceiling	 of	 his bedroom	and	saw	the	lights	from	the	street	dancing	there	that	reflected	through

the	prism	that	hung	by	his	window.

He	sat	up,	turned	on	the	night	light	that	was	on	his	night	stand,	and	grabbed

the	 watch	 that	 sat	 there.	 He	 opened	 it	 up	 and	 noted	 that	 there	 still	 weren’t	 any hands	attached	to	it.

“That	 was	 weird,”	 Dillon	 commented	 to	 himself	 as	 he	 closed	 up	 the	 watch and	 laid	 back	 down.	 The	 dream	 seemed	 so	 real	 to	 him.	 He	 had	 real-seeming dreams	before,	but	for	some	reason	he	felt	that	this	was	different.	He	just	didn’t know	why.

He	 turned	 the	 light	 off,	 laid	 down	 again,	 and	 closed	 his	 eyes;	 hoping	 this

time	that	he	would	have	more	pleasant	dreams.





5

J O H N 	 T A Y L O R 	 S E B A S T I A N

Dillon	flew	down	the	track,	dust	being	kicked	up	by	the	bikes	in	front

of	him.	He	drifted	around	the	corner	and	noticed	that	he	was	catching

up	 with	 the	 leaders.	 This	 was	 the	 last	 bike	 race	 of	 the	 year,	 and	 he promised	himself	that	he	would	finish	in	the	top	three.	Even	though	his	parents

couldn’t	afford	the	nicer	bikes	that	most	of	the	others	used,	he	was	still	able	to keep	pace	with	them	through	his	shear	determination	and	skill.

BMX	 racing	 had	 been	 a	 big	 part	 of	 his	 life	 for	 the	 last	 four	 years,	 and	 he loved	it.	He	loved	the	adrenalin,	the	speed,	and	the	air	he	was	able	to	get	when going	over	the	jumps.

He	could	hear	his	Mom	screaming	for	him	to	go	as	he	soared	through	the	air.

He	landed	and	pumped	his	legs	furiously,	desperately	trying	to	overtake	the	biker who	was	in	third	position.	They	were	so	close	together.	Dillon	could	feel	his	legs burning	with	every	thrust	down	on	the	pedals.

He	 and	 the	 other	 biker	 raced	 around	 the	 last	 corner	 leading	 to	 the	 home stretch.	They	could	see	the	bikers	who	were	in	first	and	second	place;	they	were only	a	few	feet	ahead	of	them	and	there	were	only	two	more	jumps	and	a	short

straight	until	the	end.

They	came	over	the	first	jump	and	Dillon	managed	to	land	in	third	place	and

was	within	striking	distance	of	second,	maybe	even	first.	He	pumped	harder	and

harder.	They	went	up	the	last	jump.	Dillon	could	see	the	finish	line.	All	four	of them	were	so	close	as	they	soared	through	the	air;	they	could	almost	touch	each



other	if	they	just	reached	out.	When	he	came	down	his	landing	was	off.	He	hit

the	track	hard	and	his	front	tire	lost	its	traction	and	slid	out	from	under	him.	As the	 others	 sped	 toward	 the	 finish	 line	 Dillon	 was	 thrown	 from	 his	 bike	 and slammed	hard	onto	the	dirt	track.	The	momentum	carried	him	for	a	few	feet	as

he	rolled	and	slid	to	a	halt.	There	was	a	collective	sound	of	shock	that	came	from the	crowd	as	he	hit	the	ground.	He	could	hear	his	Mom	shriek.

He	coughed	and	wheezed	as	he	tried	to	get	some	air	back	into	his	lungs.	As

he	got	to	his	knees	he	saw	other	bikers	landing	the	jump	and	whipping	past	him.

A	few	of	them	landed	so	close	that	he	thought	they	were	going	to	crash	into	him, but	luckily	that	didn’t	happen.

After	 what	 seemed	 a	 long	 moment	 he	 climbed	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 the	 crowd erupted	into	cheers.	He	could	see	the	medical	staff	running	toward	him	but	tried to	wave	them	off.	He	knew	they	weren’t	going	to	stop	so,	before	they	could	get

to	 him,	 he	 picked	 up	 his	 bike,	 mounted	 it,	 and	 road	 to	 the	 line.	 As	 he	 crossed over	and	finished	the	race	he	didn’t	feel	so	bad	anymore	about	coming	in	dead

last.

THE	WEEK	AND	A	HALF	AFTER	THE	END	OF	SCHOOL	WAS	PRETTY	UNEVENTFUL.	HE

hung	out	with	Sarah	a	few	times	and	their	other	friend	on	the	street,	Evan.	They had	 some	 pretty	 decent	 times	 together,	 but	 what	 all	 of	 them	 were	 really interested	 in	 was	 the	 trip	 his	 family	 was	 taking	 to	 Dust	 Valley	 Desert	 Oasis Resort.

“Look	here!”	Sarah	exclaimed,	as	she	pointed	to	the	computer	screen.

Dillon,	 their	 friend	 Evan,	 and	 her	 were	 all	 hunched	 over	 the	 table	 staring intently	 at	 the	 screen.	 They	 had	 decided	 that	 it	 would	 be	 cool	 to	 do	 some research	on	Dust	Valley	Desert	Oasis	Resort	since	it	wasn’t	a	really	well	known

attraction	yet.	Unfortunately,	it	was	too	expensive	for	the	family	budget	to	have ever	allowed	them	to	go;	that	is,	until	Dad	won	the	trip.

“It	looks	like	this	is	an	awesome	place	for	trail	riding,	swimming,	and	they

have	a	ton	of	other	cool	activities,”	said	Sarah,	trying	to	keep	her	voice	down	as

she	certainly	didn’t	want	to	call	down	the	wrath	of	the	librarian	upon	them.

“Ya,	that	is	cool,”	replied	Dillon.	“I	also	found,	on	the	site	that	I	was	looking at	earlier,	that	the	resort	is	in	the	middle	of	the	desert,	but	where	it	is,	is	nestled by	a	lush	lake	with	palm	trees,	lots	of	green	grass,	and	all	sorts	of	vegetation.	No one	knows	how	this	is	possible,	but	there	are	many	theories	behind	the	mystery.”

Sarah	 glanced	 at	 her	 friend	 with	 interest,	 silently	 prodding	 him	 to	 go	 on.

Evan	perked	up	as	well	as	soon	as	Dillon	mentioned	“mysteries.”

“Well,”	Dillon	started	after	clearing	his	throat.	“Some	believe	that	there	was

a	magic	spell	put	on	the	place	by	some	sort	of	creature	that	helped	a	lost	Indian tribe:	 the	 Tokala	 tribe.	 They	 say	 that	 the	 tribe	 was	 forced	 into	 the	 desert	 by	 a band	 of	 US	 soldiers	 back	 in	 the	 1800’s.	 The	 survivors	 narrowly	 escaped	 being killed	 and	 found	 this	 valley.	 They	 were	 all	 but	 about	 to	 die	 of	 thirst	 when suddenly	 they	 saw	 a	 being	 show	 up	 whose	 robes	 were	 so	 white	 that	 they appeared	to	glow.	Whatever	it	was	shook	the	earth	and	water	began	to	come	up

from	 below.	 Soon	 after,	 vegetation	 began	 to	 grow	 and	 the	 place	 revitalized.

Apparently	 many	 geologists	 have	 searched	 around	 for	 an	 entrance	 to	 an

underground	spring,	but	no	one	has	found	it	except	maybe	one.”

Dillon	 paused	 in	 his	 story	 telling	 for	 effect	 until	 Sarah	 finally	 burst	 out,

“Who!”

He	 smiled	 before	 beginning	 his	 tale	 again.	 “I	 say	 maybe	 because	 there, apparently,	was	a	famed	and	wealthy	archeologist	named	John	Taylor	Sebastian

who,	in	2016	thoroughly	explored	the	grounds.	When	he	was	about	to	give	up	it

was	reported	that	he	disappeared,	but	no	one	saw	him	leave	the	area.”

Sarah	gasped.	Evan’s	mouth	hung	open.

“That’s	way	more	interesting	than	the	site	I	found,”	she	replied.

“Ya,	 the	 news	 report	 I	 found	 said	 that	 his	 car	 and	 all	 the	 belongings	 were discovered	at	the	place	he	was	renting,”	he	continued.	“There	was	a	cryptic	note stating	 that	 he	 had	 found	 something	 significant,	 but	 there	 were	 no	 details	 as	 to where	 he	 was	 going.	 His	 field	 pack	 with	 his	 equipment	 was	 also	 missing.

Presumably,	he	took	it	with	him	to	wherever	he	was	going.”

“What	did	the	note	say	exactly?”	Sarah	asked.

“I	 don’t	 know,	 as	 there	 was	 no	 information	 about	 it	 from	 the	 sources	 I

checked	 because	 no	 one	 knows	 where	 the	 note	 went.	 Some	 even	 doubt	 if	 it actually	really	existed.”

The	 three	 of	 them	 sat	 in	 silence	 for	 a	 moment,	 trying	 to	 digest	 the	 creepy story.

Finally	Evan	asked,	“So	if	John	Taylor	Sebastian	actually	found	the	entrance

to	the	source	of	whatever	is	causing	the	Oasis	to	thrive,	then	that	means	he	most likely	died	on	his	quest?”

All	Dillon	could	do	was	nod	slightly	at	Evan’s	logic.

“Cool!”	 Evan	 exclaimed	 in	 amazement.	 Sarah	 punched	 him	 in	 the	 arm	 and scowled.

Dillon	laughed.	“I	think	the	whole	tale	about	the	tribe	fleeing	for	their	lives, and	 the	 mysterious	 supernatural	 event	 that	 saved	 them	 was	 probably	 just	 made up.	I	checked	other	sources	which	suspect	that	the	Oasis	is	only	about	five	years old	 or	 so.	 At	 least	 that’s	 when	 the	 resort	 opened.	 The	 story	 was	 probably fabricated	in	order	to	bring	more	visitors.	It’s	pretty	good	marketing	if	you	ask me.

“Then	what	about	John	Taylor	Sebastian?”	Evan	asked.	“Is	that	true?”

Dillon	 looked	 at	 them	 both,	 suddenly	 serious	 again.	 “Actually,	 that	 part	 is true.	 And	 the	 part	 about	 the	 other	 scientists	 trying	 to	 find	 the	 source	 of	 what gives	 the	 Oasis	 life	 is	 true	 too.	 There	 has	 been	 no	 record	 of	 this	 place	 existing until	 about	 five	 years	 ago	 as	 I	 said.	 This	 naturally	 piqued	 the	 curiosity	 of	 the scientific	community	who	have	had	limited	excursions,	but	nothing	significant,

as	I	said,	has	been	found.”

“What	do	you	mean	by	 limited?”	Evan	asked	as	he	was	really	getting	drawn into	the	story	now.

“Well	the	place	 is	actually	private	 property,”	Dillon	replied.	 “It’s	owned	by the	Tokala	Indian	tribe—the	same	tribe	from	the	story—who	has	allowed	access

to	 the	 premises	 to	 certain	 researchers,	 but	 they	 have	 not	 given	 complete permission	 to	 do	 what	 they	 want.	 The	 band	 also	 claims	 not	 to	 know	 how	 the Oasis	 began,	 which	 is	 why	 they	 let	 scientists	 come	 and	 investigate.	 They	 are probably	interested	in	finding	out	why	the	Oasis	is	thriving	so	well.”

“That	makes	sense,”	Sarah	interjected.	“They	do	have	a	business	to	run	after

all.	 And,	 even	 though	 they	 are	 probably	 curious,	 too	 much	 snooping	 around might	disrupt	things	for	them.”

She	 looked	 at	 Dillon	 right	 in	 the	 eyes.	 “You	 have	 to	 promise	 me	 that	 you won’t	 do	 anything	 stupid	 like	 going	 to	 look	 for	 this	 entrance,”	 Sarah	 stated sternly.

Dillon	laughed	again.	“If	most	people—scientists—spend	months	or	a	couple

of	years	trying	to	find	this	secret	source,	then	how	do	you	think	I’ll	find	it	in	two weeks?”

“I	 don’t	 know,”	 Sarah	 responded	 as	 she	 sat	 back	 trying	 to	 digest	 the	 story.

“But	you	tend	to	find	things	that	others	don’t.	It’s	actually	kind	of	creepy.”

Dillon	 smiled,	 trying	 to	 reassure	 her	 without	 actually	 saying	 anything

because,	 truth	 be	 told,	 he	 does	 end	 up	 stumbling	 upon	 things	 that	 others	 don’t.

It’s	really	not	his	fault	he	thought	to	himself.

Despite	what	the	origin	of	the	Oasis	was,	the	one	fact	remained:	no	one	has

ever	 found	 out	 when	 and	 where	 it	 came	 from.	 No	 one	 except	 maybe	 this	 John guy,	and	he’s	been	missing	for	a	while	now.





6

T H E 	 A R R O W H E A D

Dillon’s	hand	reached	toward	the	symbol	that	was	etched	into	the	cold

stone	wall.	His	fingers	quivered	slightly	as	he	rubbed	them	across	the

carving.	There	was	writing	surrounding	the	image	on	the	wall,	but	he

couldn’t	 make	 out	 the	 language.	 The	 image	 was	 a	 pentagram	 boxed	 in	 by	 a square,	and	in	the	center	of	the	pentagram	was	what	appeared	to	be	an	eye.

Dillon	felt	a	chill	as	a	blast	of	wind	came	down	the	tunnel,	causing	the	flame

on	his	torch	to	waver	a	little.	He	would	have	used	the	light	on	his	phone,	but	the battery	 died	 out	 a	 few	 minutes	 earlier,	 which	 was	 weird	 given	 the	 fact	 that	 it should	have	lasted	longer	than	that	as	he	had	a	fresh	charge.

He	felt	a	slight	tug	on	the	arm	of	his	shirt.	When	he	glanced	over	he	saw	his

sister,	Gwen,	standing	beside	him;	her	eyes	showing	that	she	was	distressed.	“I

want	to	get	out	of	here,”	she	said	to	him	in	a	soft	tone,	a	tear	trickling	down	her cheek.

“We	will	Gwen,”	Dillon	replied.	Truthfully,	however,	he	wasn’t	sure	how	he

would	 be	 able	 to	 get	 them	 out.	 But	 he	 couldn't	 let	 his	 sister	 know	 his	 doubts.

Whatever	 it	 took,	 he	 knew	 he	 would	 have	 to	 do	 what	 he	 could	 to	 keep	 them alive.

As	they	stood	there	looking	at	the	carving	on	the	wall,	trying	to	make	sense

of	 it,	 they	 both	 heard	 the	 sound	 of	 something	 coming	 from	 down	 the	 tunnel.

They	 jerked	 their	 heads	 around,	 Dillon	 waved	 the	 torch	 in	 front	 of	 him	 so	 he could	 get	 as	 much	 light	 as	 he	 could.	 From	 the	 shadows	 he	 saw	 movement

coming	 toward	 them.	 Gwen	 tightened	 her	 grip	 on	 her	 brother’s	 arm.	 Dillon reflexively	 went	 for	 a	 weapon,	 but	 quickly	 realized	 that	 the	 only	 thing	 he	 had that	would	help	was	the	torch.

Suddenly	 something	 jumped	 from	 the	 shadows.	 It	 hurled	 its	 bulbous	 body toward	 them.	 Gwen	 shrieked.	 Dillon	 pushed	 his	 sister	 aside	 and	 the	 creature sailed	between	them.	Dillon	slammed	into	the	side	of	the	tunnel	opposite	Gwen.

He	looked	to	where	the	creature	had	landed	and,	as	the	light	of	the	torch	touched the	 area,	 he	 noticed	 a	 large	 spider-like	 thing	 quickly	 spinning	 around.	 It	 was about	the	size	of	a	soccer	ball,	had	grotesque	pincers	protruding	out	of	its	maw, and	 a	 large	 hairy	 bulbous	 body.	 It	 had	 two	 massive	 lidless	 eyes	 and	 made	 a strange	 clicking	 sound	 as	 it	 moved	 its	 head	 side-to-side.	 It	 flinched	 and	 shied away	from	Dillon	as	though	its	eyes	were	incredibly	sensitive	to	the	light.

Gwen	yelped	again	as	she	saw	the	creature	in	the	full	brightness	of	the	torch.

Immediately,	 despite	 the	 torchlight,	 it	 seemed	 to	 hone	 in	 on	 her	 and	 pounced.

Dillon	 launched	 forward	 and	 swatted	 it	 out	 of	 the	 air	 with	 the	 torch.	 It	 made	 a screech	as	it	hit	the	wall	hard	and	slumped	to	the	ground.	Its	many	legs	flailed wildly	 as	 it	 tried	 to	 right	 itself.	 Gwen	 leaped	 away	 as	 Dillon	 went	 in	 and	 hit	 it again	and	again	and	again	until	it	stopped	moving.

“Wha	…	What	is	that?”	Gwen	asked,	wiping	away	tears	from	her	eyes.

“I	don’t	know,”	replied	Dillon	as	he	poked	at	it	with	his	foot.	“But	let’s	not

wait	around	to	find	out.”	With	that,	he	grabbed	Gwen	by	the	arm	and	started	off

down	the	tunnel	the	opposite	way	the	creature	had	come.	As	soon	as	they	started

off,	 they	 could	 hear	 more	 movement	 coming	 toward	 them,	 lots	 of	 movement.

And	 that	 clicking!	 Gwen	 tried	 hard	 to	 suppress	 her	 fear	 but	 couldn’t.	 “There’s more	coming!”	she	screamed.

Dillon	 pulled	 his	 sister	 down	 the	 passage	 as	 fast	 as	 he	 could.	 The	 sound	 of the	monster’s	many	legs	was	getting	louder	as	the	creatures	were	closing	in,	and the	clicking	they	made	was	terrifying.	As	Dillon	and	Gwen	ran	they	could	hear

the	 sound	 of	 running	 water	 coming	 from	 up	 ahead.	 The	 tunnel	 dipped	 and turned,	 obviously	 not	 being	 man	 made,	 but	 rather	 formed	 by	 some	 natural process	 from	 long	 ago.	 The	 sound	 of	 the	 water	 was	 getting	 louder,	 almost drowning	out	the	sound	of	the	creature’s	advance.	They	rounded	another	corner



and	 the	 tunnel	 opened	 into	 a	 large	 cavern.	 They	 found	 themselves	 on	 a	 wide ledge	that	was	about	ten	feet	long	and	ended	in	a	shear	drop	into	darkness.	The

cavern	was	dimly	lit;	its	walls	sparkling	as	though	the	two	were	looking	at	the

night	sky	except	that	the	sky	was	all	around	them.

Dillon	didn’t	have	time	to	enjoy	the	scenery,	however,	as	the	bulbous	beasts

came	charging	around	the	corner.	Dillon	and	Gwen	backed	toward	the	ledge	as

Dillon	held	his	torch	as	high	as	he	could	out	in	front	of	him	as	far	as	he	could, trying	to	illuminate	as	much	area	as	possible.	The	first	creatures	who	came	out

of	 the	 tunnel	 immediately	 flinched	 and	 slowed	 as	 the	 light	 hit	 their	 eyes.	 They still	seemed	interested	in	the	pursuit,	but	moved	cautiously	as	the	brightness	of the	torch	stung	their	eyes.

One	of	the	creatures	leaped	at	them,	but	Dillon	was	quick	to	knock	it	out	of

the	 way	 with	 the	 torch.	 Sparks	 flew	 as	 he	 made	 contact	 with	 it	 and	 it	 issued	 a horrifying	shriek	as	it	tumbled	from	the	ledge	and	into	the	dark	below.

Gwen	 wept	 as	 the	 others,	 about	 ten	 in	 number	 now,	 slowly	 approached,

pincers	snapping.	“Get	away	from	us!”	Gwen	shouted,	picking	up	a	nearby	rock

and	 tossing	 it	 at	 the	 nearest	 monster.	 She	 hit	 it	 in	 the	 eye	 and	 it	 shrieked	 as	 it backed	a	little.

“What	are	we	gonna	do	Dillon?”	asked	an	agitated	Gwen.

“There’s	only	one	thing	we	can	do	Gwen,”	replied	Dillon	in	as	even	a	tone	as

he	 could	 muster.	 He	 looked	 down	 at	 his	 sister,	 picked	 her	 up	 in	 his	 arms,	 and leaped	from	the	ledge.

“DILLON!	DILLON!”	GWEN	NUDGED	HER	BROTHER.

Dillon	moved	his	head	slightly,	his	eyes	fluttering	open.	Staring	at	him	were

the	bright	eyes	and	beaming	smile	of	his	little	sister.	He	looked	around	groggily and	realized	he	was	in	the	back	of	the	Hunt	family	van	as	they	were	travelling	to Dust	Valley	Desert	Oasis	Resort.

“Wow,	that	was	a	crazy	dream,”	he	whispered	to	himself.

“It	 must	 have	 been!”	 Gwen	 exclaimed.	 “You	 were	 moving	 around	 pretty

good.	And	mumbling	stuff.”

“Oh	yeah	…	like	what?”	Dillon	asked,	a	look	of	curiosity	splayed	across	his

face.

“I	don’t	know	exactly,”	Gwen	stated.	“It	was	kinda	hard	to	make	out.	I	think

it	 had	 something	 to	 do	 with	 spiders.	 I	 thought	 you	 were	 going	 to	 wake	 up screaming	actually.”

Dillon	 looked	 at	 her	 seriously	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 then	 smiled;	 his	 usual disarming	smile.	“Well	it’s	a	good	thing	that	didn’t	happen.”

Gwen	giggled.

The	car	trip	to	Dust	Valley	Desert	Oasis	Resort	was	about	eight	hours	from

home	 and,	 as	 far	 as	 car	 trips	 went,	 it	 was	 pretty	 standard	 for	 the	 Hunt	 family, except	for	Dillon’s	dream.	His	imagination	was	always	exceptionally	active,	but

when	he	went	to	bed	he	didn’t	normally	have	such	intense	dreams.	He	thought

that	 maybe	 it	 was	 all	 the	 excitement	 and	 anticipation	 waiting	 for	 the	 family vacation.

Jordan,	as	always,	had	his	face	stuck	in	a	game	of	some	sort;	whether	it	was

DS,	phone,	tablet,	or	the	like.	The	only	sounds	you	would	get	out	of	him	were

the	 sounds	 of	 victory	 (“Yeah!!!!	 I	 told	 you,	 you	 were	 going	 down!),	 or	 defeat (“Ahhhhh!	 …	 What	 the	 …	 !	 …	 Oh	 come	 on!).	 After	 Dillon	 woke	 up	 Gwen would	notice	him	marking	down	something	in	his	book	every	time	Jordan	made

one	of	his	outbursts.

“What	are	you	doing?”	she	leaned	over	and	whispered.

“It’s	a	social	 experiment,”	he	replied.	 “I’m	marking	down	 how	many	 times

he	loses	verses	how	many	times	he	wins.”

She	smiled	and	nodded.	“How’s	he	doing?”

“Not	very	good	I’m	afraid.”

Gwen	giggled	and	then	went	back	to	playing	one	of	her	games	on	her	tablet.

Claire	had	her	face	securely	planted	in	her	phone,	making	sure	she	was	able

to	keep	up	on	the	latest	drama	with	her	friends.	After	all,	she	was	fourteen	and,	it was	rumoured,	that	the	world	would	stop	spinning	if	she	missed	something	that

happened	 on	 social	 media!	 Once	 in	 a	 while	 she	 would	 grimace	 and	 complain when	 the	 van	 hit	 a	 dead	 spot	 in	 the	 cell	 service,	 and	 then	 resumed	 again	 when

the	service	came	back.

Dillon,	 however,	 continued	 to	 read	 the	 information	 he	 had	 found	 on	 Dust Valley	Desert	Oasis	Resort.	As	the	van	continued	to	roll	along	down	the	highway

on	 their	 lengthy	 trip,	 Dillon	 noticed	 a	 distinctive	 change	 in	 the	 scenery	 which caught	his	attention.	 The	landscape	went	 from	lush	green	 forests	and	mountain scenes,	to	flat	arid	land.	He	started	to	notice	areas	with	large	plateaus	high	in	the sky,	 shrub	 brush,	 even	 small	 canyons.	 He	 saw	 a	 variety	 of	 different	 wildlife: antelope,	 large	 birds	 of	 prey,	 and	 even	 a	 few	 wild	 horses.	 The	 sky	 was	 vast, strikingly	 blue,	 and	 lit	 up	 with	 bright	 sunshine.	 As	 they	 drove	 further	 to	 their goal	the	ground	turned	to	a	baked	reddish-yellowish	color.

A	 couple	 of	 hours	 after	 their	 last	 rest	 break	 the	 van	 began	 to	 slow	 again	 as Dad	decided	that	it	was	prudent	to	make	another	quick	stop	for	a	restroom	break

at	 one	 of	 the	 Exxon	 stations.	 Apparently	 he	 also	 needed	 more	 coffee	 in	 his system	as	well.	Mom,	as	always,	reiterated	about	ten	times	the	need	for	all	of	the kids	to	go	to	the	restroom	as	there	may	not	be	another	stop	for	a	while.	As	per

usual,	Jordan	complained	that	he	had	to	get	off	of	his	gaming	system.

“You	know,	Jordan,”	Dad	said,	“there	is	a	pause	button	on	your	system	for	a

reason.”	Jordan	mumbled	something	incoherent	and	put	his	game	down.

As	 Dillon	 jumped	 out	 of	 the	 car	 the	 heat	 hit	 him!	 It	 felt	 like	 he	 had	 just opened	 the	 oven	 to	 check	 on	 the	 chocolate	 chip	 cookies! Man,	 he	 thought	 to himself, I	didn’t	realize	it	was	going	to	be	this	hot!

The	 restroom	 was	 one	 of	 those	 outdoor	 ones	 where	 you	 had	 to	 get	 the	 key from	the	attendant	inside	the	station.	As	per	usual	Jordan	managed	to	get	the	key before	Dillon	could	and	occupied	the	restroom	first.	As	Dillon	waited	outside	he noted	 the	 nice	 scenery	 of	 trees	 and	 brush	 that	 was	 around	 the	 gas	 station.	 The station	was	nestled	up	beside	a	hill	that	was	filled	with	the	hardy	desert	shrubs.

The	wind	blew	slightly,	but	there	was	no	way	it	was	going	to	lessen	the	heat.	In fact,	the	wind	made	it	seem	hotter!	Not	refreshing	at	all.

As	Dillon	was	waiting	for	Jordon	to	finish	he	saw	something	move	out	of	the

corner	of	his	eye.	He	turned	to	see	a	small	prairie	dog	standing	on	the	pavement just	outside	the	tree-line	looking	at	him.	Dillon	smiled.	“Here	boy,”	he	said	as	he stooped	down,	trying	not	to	appear	intimidating.	The	prairie	dog	looked	around	a



bit,	 came	 toward	 him	 a	 few	 feet	 and	 then	 darted	 back	 into	 the	 forest	 when	 the restroom	door	swung	open.

Jordan	looked	down	at	his	brother.	“What	are	you	doing?”	he	asked.

Dillon	stood.	“Nothing,”	he	replied.	“Just	trying	to	make	a	friend.”

Jordan	laughed.	“It’s	all	yours,”	he	said	motioning	to	the	restroom.	“I’ll	see

you	back	at	the	car	bro.”

Dillon	nodded.	When	he	came	out	a	couple	of	minutes	later	he	glanced	over

to	where	the	prairie	dog	was,	just	to	see	if	his	little	friend	was	there.	It	was	gone, but	 a	 small	 glint	 caught	 his	 eye.	 He	 walked	 over	 and,	 on	 the	 ground	 roughly where	the	squirrel	had	been,	was	a	small	steel	arrow	head.	It	was	plain	looking

except	that	the	middle	portion	of	it,	on	one	side,	had	three	bumps	formed	there, almost	 like	 nubs,	 and	 there	 was	 a	 tiny	 hole	 in	 the	 middle	 that	 was	 barely noticeable.	The	nub	nearest	the	point	was	positioned	almost	in	the	middle	of	the head,	the	next	one	was	in	the	middle	off	to	one	side,	and	the	one	positioned	near the	end	of	the	head	was	off	to	the	other	side.

“Come	on	Dillon,”	he	heard	his	Dad	holler.

The	call	was	enough	to	pull	him	from	his	thoughts.	He	quickly	scooped	up

the	arrow	head	and	rushed	back	to	the	van.

As	soon	as	Dillon	was	buckled	in	he	started	examining	his	find.	Aside	from

the	 other	 features	 he	 already	 noted	 when	 he	 first	 looked	 at	 the	 item,	 he	 also noticed	that	there	was	a	small	hole	drilled	through	the	middle	of	it. That’s	weird, he	thought	to	himself.

“Whatcha	 got	 there?”	 Gwen	 asked	 as	 she	 noticed	 that	 Dillon	 was	 handling something.

“Oh	nothing,”	Dillon	responded.	“Just	something	I	found	at	the	gas	station.”

He	said	it	like	it	was	no	big	deal,	but	deep	down	inside	he	had	that	same	strange feeling	 that	 he	 had	 with	 the	 watch.	 He	 felt	 this	 arrowhead	 was	 important somehow,	 but	 he	 didn’t	 know	 why.	 This	 feeling	 was	 irrational	 but	 he	 knew	 it was	somehow	right.	It	was	actually	starting	to	frighten	him.

DEREK	WATCHED	THE	YOUNG	BOY	RUN	TO	THE	VAN	AS	HE	CONTINUED	TO	FUEL	UP

his	car.	He	noted	how	Dillon	had	come	out	of	the	restroom	and	then	observed,

with	surprise,	as	something	caught	the	boys	attention. He	found	the	arrow	head	I just	placed	there! he	thought	to	himself.	He	was	amazed	at	the	power	of	Dillon’s apparent	observational	skills.	It	was	quite	impressive.	There	had	to	be	some	sort of	inherent	ability	to	observe	changes	in	his	surroundings	which	displayed	itself in	 finding	 things	 that	 others	 might	 miss,	 he	 reasoned	 to	 himself. Although,	 he thought, it	wouldn’t	be	the	first	time	he	had	seen	something	weird	that	couldn’t be	explained	by	any	science	that	they	knew	of.

He	finished	filling	up	his	tank,	grabbed	the	receipt	off	the	pump,	and	climbed

back	in	his	car.	Jake	was	sitting	in	the	passenger	seat	this	time.

“Do	you	think	it	wise	to	be	giving	these	items	to	the	boy?”	Derek	asked.

Jake	merely	shrugged.	“I’m	sure	we	could	get	them	back	some	way	or	other

if	we	had	to.	Besides,	we’re	running	out	of	options	and	we	need	someone	who

will	be	able	to	find	the	entrance	for	us.”

“It	is	pretty	desperate	to	leave	our	fortunes	in	the	hands	of	a	twelve	year	old

boy,”	Derek	reasoned.

“We	 are	 desperate!”	 Jake	 snapped	 back.	 After	 he	 calmed	 himself	 he	 said,

“It’s	 been	 a	 while	 since	 we	 have	 had	 any	 breaks	 in	 this	 case	 and,	 with	 the changes	in	Dillon’s	grandfather,	we	had	to	go	with	Dillon.”

“Why	not	his	Dad	or	any	of	his	other	siblings?”	asked	Derek.

Jake	shook	his	head.	“No,	we	observed	his	Dad	and	he	just	doesn’t	seem	to

have	the	gift.	His	brother	and	older	sister	are	a	lot	different	than	Dillon	and	don’t exhibit	any	of	the	traits	of	their	grandfather	either.”

“And	what	about	his	younger	sister?”	Derek	asked	with	intrigue.

Jake	 paused	 for	 a	 moment	 before	 he	 spoke,	 almost	 as	 if	 to	 collect	 his thoughts.	“Even	if	his	younger	sister	does	exhibit	the	same	kind	of	qualities	she’s too	young	to	help	us	out	with	this	particular	exhibition,”	he	said	at	length.

“And	a	twelve	year	old	boy	isn’t?”	Derek	asked	skeptically.

All	he	got	in	return	from	Jake	was	a	slight	smirk	as	he	turned	the	ignition	in

the	car	and	pulled	away	from	the	gas	station	as	they	continued	to	head	for	Dust

Valley	Desert	Oasis	Resort.





7

T H E 	 I N F O R M A T I O N 	 C E N T E R

The	Hunt	family	van	rolled	smoothly	through	the	hills	and	valleys	of

the	desolate	desert.	Cacti	were	scattered	throughout	the	landscape,	and

vultures	could	be	seen	high	up	in	the	sky	circling	the	terrain,	waiting

to	 pounce	 upon	 any	 of	 the	 small	 creatures	 they	 could	 see	 (living	 or	 dead)	 that were	sprinkled	throughout	the	arid	land.

Jordan,	Claire,	and	Gwen	were	all	sleeping	by	this	time	as	they	were	pretty

worn	 out	 by	 the	 long	 drive	 and	 the	 monotonous	 view.	 Dillon,	 however,	 stared intently	 out	 the	 window	 imagining	 some	 grand	 adventure	 where	 he	 was	 being chased	by	creatures	that	have	been	hidden	for	years	amongst	the	many	caves	and

valleys	that	made	the	rocky	desert	interesting. This	would	be	an	awesome	spot	to explore! he	thought	to	himself.

“Hey	Dad.	I	don’t	suppose	there	are	any	rest	stops	coming	up	where	we	can

get	out	at	and	take	a	look	around?”	he	asked.

“Unfortunately	not,”	Dad	replied.	“Besides,	we	are	actually	almost	there.”

Dillon	looked	out	the	window	skeptically.	“Okay,”	he	replied	dejectedly.

“Don’t	be	like	that,”	Mom	reprimanded	gently.	“There	are	going	to	be	tons

of	places	for	you	to	explore	when	we	get	to	the	resort.	It	won’t	be	long	now	…

probably	within	the	hour,”	she	stated.

About	 twenty	 minutes	 later	 Dillon	 felt	 the	 van	 slowing.	 He	 looked	 out	 the front	window	and	noticed	that	dad	seemed	to	be	pulling	over	to	an	information

center.	He	looked	at	Dillon	in	the	rear	view	mirror	and	smirked.	“Maybe	we	can

afford	a	quick	stop.”

“Awesome!”	responded	Dillon.

“But	we’re	not	exploring,”	Dad	was	quick	to	add.	“We’re	just	here	to	see	if

there’s	more	information	on	the	place	than	what	they	already	sent	to	us.”

“Sounds	 good	 to	 me,”	 Dillon	 replied,	 sitting	 up	 all	 the	 straighter	 now	 and acting	as	though	new	energy	had	been	injected	into	him.

The	other	kids	woke	up	as	soon	as	the	van	was	pulling	into	the	parking	lot.

The	 only	 one	 who	 didn’t	 seem	 interested	 in	 checking	 out	 the	 info	 center	 was Claire.	 She	 just	 seemed	 more	 interested	 in	 staying	 with	 the	 van	 and	 “chilling”

but	Dad	made	her	get	out	anyway	and	go	inside	with	them.	There	was	no	way	he

was	going	to	leave	the	van	on	in	order	to	keep	the	AC	running,	and	he	couldn’t

leave	her	in	a	vehicle	by	herself	in	this	desert	heat.

Dillon	and	Gwen	were	the	first	to	burst	through	the	doors.	As	they	did	they

were	immediately	struck	 with	the	sound	 of	multiple	chimes	 at	different	pitches going	off	in	a	musical	pattern	that	sounded	almost	harp-like.	They	both	stopped

and	 looked	 for	 the	 source.	 There,	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 door	 were	 hand-crafted wooden	 pipes	 which	 were	 strung	 together	 with	 thin	 pieces	 of	 cord	 weaved through	 each	 pipe	 at	 different	 intervals.	 Hanging	 from	 the	 pipes	 were	 small hammers	that	moved	and	struck	the	strings	as	the	door	swung	the	chime	freely

when	 it	 was	 opened.	 The	 pipes	 also	 had	 holes	 of	 different	 sizes	 in	 them	 which whistled	as	they	moved	and	air	passed	through	them.

“Cool!”	Dillon	and	Gwen	both	exclaimed	at	the	same	time.

The	 main	 room	 was	 circular	 with	 lots	 of	 different	 kinds	 of	 stuffed	 critters that	 were	 native	 to	 the	 area	 mounted	 on	 the	 walls	 and	 some	 standing	 on pedestals.	Gwen	was	in	awe.	She	looked	around	the	large	room	and	tried	to	take

it	 all	 in.	 As	 she	 turned	 her	 head	 she	 jumped	 back	 and	 yelped	 as	 her	 face	 was inches	 from	 a	 grizzly	 looking	 stuffed	 coyote	 that	 was	 barring	 its	 fangs.	 Dad chuckled	 and	 put	 his	 arm	 around	 her	 when	 he	 came	 through	 the	 door.	 Dillon, Jordan,	and	Mom	were	already	checking	out	the	rest	of	the	info	center.

“It’s	 okay	 honey,”	 he	 said	 reassuringly.	 “It’s	 just	 a	 stuffed	 animal,	 like	 the ones	you	have	at	home.”

Slowly	she	reached	over	and	touched	the	thing	on	the	nose.	It	felt	warm.	She

quickly	pulled	her	hand	away	and	stared	at	it	in	the	eyes.	“It’s	eyes	look	so	 real,”

Gwen	said	as	she	further	inspected	the	creature.

“Some	say	that	you	can	feel	old	Charlie	here	bore	through	your	soul	when	he

looks	at	you,”	came	a	deep	voice	from	the	side.	Dad	and	Gwen	both	looked	over

to	see	an	older	native	man,	with	long	jet	black	hair	that	was	streaked	with	silver.

His	face	was	wrinkled	and	weathered	from	years	of	living	under	the	hot	desert

sun.	 He	 wore	 tattered	 jeans,	 a	 plain	 baby	 blue	 t-shirt,	 and	 a	 worn	 leather	 vest.

His	brown	combat	boots	made	a	distinctive	clunking	sound	as	he	strolled	across

the	wooden	floor	toward	the	Hunts.

“But	 I	 personally	 think	 those	 people	 are	 crazy,”	 he	 finished	 with	 a	 slight chuckle.	“The	name’s	Tom	Tom,”	he	said	to	dad	as	he	held	out	his	hand.

Dad	took	his	hand	and	gave	him	a	firm	shake.	“I’m	Bruce	Hunt	and	this	is

my	daughter	Gwen.”

Tom	Tom	looked	down	at	the	little	girl	and	smiled.	“My	friends	call	me	Old

Tom	 Tom,”	 he	 said	 as	 he	 stooped	 down	 and	 held	 out	 his	 hand	 to	 Gwen.	 She shied	away,	being	a	little	unnerved	by	the	stranger.

“Go	on	Gwen,”	Dad	prodded.	“There’s	nothing	to	be	afraid	of.”

She	hesitantly	stuck	her	hand	out	and	shook	his	lightly.

“Now	 that’s	 better,”	 he	 said,	 standing	 up	 again.	 “What	 brings	 you	 folks here?”

“We’re	just	on	our	way	to	the	resort,”	Dad	replied.	“I	imagine	that	most	of

the	people	you	see	around	here	are	on	their	way	there.”

Tom	Tom	nodded.

“Is	there	anything	I	can	get	you	in	particular?”	he	asked.

“No,”	Dad	said.	“I	think	we’re	just	looking	around.”

“Well,	 if	 you	 need	 anything	 just	 give	 me	 a	 shout,”	 Tom	 Tom	 said	 as	 he walked	back	over	to	the	counter.

Gwen,	Mom,	and	Claire	headed	over	to	the	toys	and	activity	area,	while	dad

and	 Jordan	 wandered	 around	 the	 clothing	 area.	 Dillon	 found	 himself	 drawn	 to where	they	had	the	books.	There	were	lots	of	interesting	books	on	the	local	area.

Some	 of	 the	 books	 had	 maps	 to	 places	 of	 interest,	 and	 there	 were	 brochures advertising	many	of	the	surrounding	area	activities.

As	Dillon	scanned	the	rack	one	book	in	particular	caught	his	attention.	It	was a	book	on	the	archeologist	John	Taylor	Sebastian!

“No	way!”	exclaimed	Dillon	to	himself.	He	thumbed	through	the	pages	and

read	a	sentence	here	and	there.	Then	he	flipped	the	book	over	to	read	the	back.

There	was	a	picture	of	John	Taylor	Sebastian	himself	in	the	top	corner.	He	was	a middle-aged	 man—when	 this	 picture	 was	 taken	 at	 least—with	 light	 brown

greying	hair	with	a	medium	build.	He	wore	a	distinctive	hat	that	appeared	to	be

an	Australian	oilskin	cowboy	hat.	He	 kind	 of	 resembled	 that	 archeologist	 from those	 popular	 movies	 that	 started	 in	 the	 80’s	 that	 Mom	 and	 Dad	 always	 spoke about:	 Indiana	 Jones.	 The	 rest	 of	 his	 clothes	 appeared	 to	 be	 general	 everyday wear	for	outdoor	activities:	jeans,	t-shirt,	and	hiking	boots.

The	back	of	the	book	read:

John	Taylor	Sebastian,	an	archeologist	and	philanthropist;	a	man	with	a	dream and	the	passion	to	pursue	it!	He	was	a	real	life	modern-day	adventurer	with	his love	of	ancient	mysteries	and	exciting	lore.

His	most	remembered	project	was	his	search	for	the	source	of	the	Desert	Oasis Resort’s	underground	springs	which	many	think	brought	the	area	to	life.

This	book	is	exhilarating	and	full	of	information	as	to	his	search	and	eventual failure.

To	this	day,	no	one	knows	what	exactly	happened	to	John	Taylor	Sebastian	and many	rumors	have	been	put	forth	to	explain	his	strange	and	sudden

disappearance,	but	none	of	these	have	ever	been	verified.

“IT	 LOOKS	 LIKE	 YOU	 FOUND	 A	 GREAT	 READ,”	 A	 DEEP	 VOICE	 SAID	 FROM	 BESIDE

Dillon.

Dillon	 jumped	 and	 almost	 dropped	 the	 book.	 He	 looked	 over	 to	 see	 Tom Tom	standing	beside	him.

“Man,	 for	 a	 big	 guy,	 you’re	 pretty	 stealthy,”	 Dillon	 said	 as	 he	 collected himself.

Tom	Tom	offered	a	smile.	“You	interested	in	that	stuff	kid?”	Tom	Tom	asked.

“Well	…	sort	of,”	he	responded.	“I	mean	…	I	have	a	thing	for	exploring	new

places	and	I’ve	read	a	little	bit	about	this	guy.”	He	pointed	to	the	picture	on	the back	 of	 the	 book.	 “It’s	 weird	 though,”	 he	 continued,	 “there’s	 not	 a	 lot	 of information	 of	 him	 on-line.	 I	 mean	 …	 one	 would	 think	 that	 a	 man	 with	 his reputation	would	be	more	well-known	than	he	is.”

“Ya,	 you	 would	 think	 so	 wouldn’t	 you,”	 said	 Tom	 Tom.	 “Maybe	 someone

doesn’t	want	people	to	know	about	him?”	he	asked	with	a	quizzical	look.

Dillon	glanced	at	him	questioningly.	“What	do	you	mean?”	he	asked.

“Oh	nothing.	Just	the	crazy	ramblings	of	an	old	guy,”	he	said	with	a	chuckle.

“If	you	like	that	book,	you	should	get	this	one	too.”	He	reached	onto	another	part of	the	rack	and	grabbed	a	smaller	book	with	the	title:	“Creatures	of	the	Desert.”

Dillon	took	the	book	in	his	hands	and	looked	it	over.	It	definitely	piqued	his

curiosity.	“Why	would	you	think	that	I’d	be	interested	in	this?”	he	asked	as	he

looked	up	at	Tom	Tom.

“Oh	…	I	don’t	know,”	Tom	Tom	replied.	“It	just	looks	like	the	kind	of	thing

a	 kid	 like	 you	 would	 enjoy.	 Aren’t	 there	 always	 interesting	 creatures	 in adventures?”	With	that,	he	turned	and	headed	for	the	front	counter	once	more.

Dillon	 flipped	 through	 the	 two	 books	 for	 a	 bit	 more	 and	 then	 rummaged through	the	rest	of	the	rack;	nothing	else	interested	him.	He	had	a	strange	feeling in	 his	 gut	 that	 these	 books	 would	 be	 a	 little	 more	 than	 interesting.	 He	 couldn’t explain	why	he	felt	that	way.	It	was	the	same	kind	of	sense	he	got	when	he	found the	watch	and	arrow	head.	Finally,	Dad	called	to	him	which	jolted	him	from	his

thoughts,	and	said	that	they	were	leaving.

“Just	 a	 minute	 Dad,”	 Dillon	 called	 back.	 He	 hurried	 to	 the	 counter	 and placed	the	books	in	front	of	Tom	Tom.

“Is	that	everything?”	Tom	Tom	asked.

“I	 don’t	 know,”	 Dillon	 responded.	 “You	 seem	 to	 know	 what	 I	 might	 be

interested	in.	Any	ideas?”

Tom	 Tom	 looked	 at	 Dillon	 for	 a	 moment	 then	 smiled.	 “I	 can’t	 think	 of anything	right	now,	but	we’re	only	a	few	miles	from	the	resort	if	you	realize	that you	need	something.”

“Sounds	 good	 to	 me.”	 Dillon	 laid	 his	 money	 on	 the	 counter,	 received	 his change,	and	headed	for	the	van.	As	he	turned	to	go	he	noticed	something	out	of

the	 corner	 of	 his	 eye.	 He	 thought	 he	 saw,	 what	 looked	 like,	 the	 square surrounding	 a	 pentagram,	 with	 an	 eye	 in	 the	 center	 symbol	 that	 he	 had	 seen	 in his	 dream	 earlier	 that	 day.	 When	 he	 snapped	 his	 head	 around	 to	 look	 he	 didn’t see	 anything	 that	 looked	 like	 that.	 He	 scanned	 the	 area	 for	 a	 moment,	 but nothing.	Nothing	but	that	gut	feel	again.

“Everything	okay?”	asked	Tom	Tom	in	his	deep	voice.

“Ya	…	I	just	thought	I	saw	…	”

“Saw	what?”	Tom	Tom	pressed.

Dillon	gave	himself	a	shake. The	long	drive	must	be	messing	with	my	brain.

“Oh,	nothing,”	he	replied,	turning	away	from	Tom	Tom.

“Dillon!	Come	on!”	Dad	hollered	as	he	came	back	into	the	info	center.

“Coming!”

Dillon	looked	back	and	saw	Tom	Tom	watching	them	as	they	left.	He	had	a

strange	feeling	that	he’d	be	seeing	the	old	man	again;	he	just	didn’t	know	why.





8

T H E 	 M Y S T E R I O U S 	 S Y M B O L

As	soon	as	the	Hunts	came	over	the	hill	that	led	to	the	mouth	of	the

valley	they	could	see	green	grass	for	miles	in	all	directions.	There	were

tropical	palm	trees	speckled	throughout	the	valley,	with	beds	of	grass,

lush	bushes,	and	groves	of	umbrella	trees.	There	were	lots	of	creeks	and	ponds

of	water	throughout	the	valley,	and	at	the	far	end	of	the	valley	they	could	see	the bright	blue	water	of	the	lake	shimmering	in	the	sunlight.	Right	in	the	middle	of the	 valley	 lay	 the	 resort	 with	 its	 numerous	 buildings,	 hotels,	 swimming	 pools, and	 lounge	 areas.	 The	 resort	 backed	 right	 onto	 the	 lake	 that	 Dillon	 had	 read about.	 On	 the	 outskirts	 of	 the	 resort	 village	 were	 a	 number	 of	 residential properties,	convenience	stores,	and	gas	stations.

“The	 information	 I’ve	 read	 says	 that	 there’s	 actually	 a	 small	 residential population	 here	 which	 is	 made	 up	 of	 the	 tribe	 members	 who	 own	 the	 land,”

Dillon	said	as	they	continued	down	the	highway	toward	the	main	entrance	to	the

resort.

“Apparently	 there	 are	 laws	 in	 place	 which	 prevent	 residential	 development from	 those	 outside	 the	 tribe.	 So	 most	 of	 the	 people	 who	 are	 here	 at	 any	 given time	 are	 tourists,	 or	 outside	 people	 they’ve	 brought	 in	 to	 help	 work	 at	 Desert Oasis.

“It	says	here	in	the	pamphlet	that,	before	the	resort	was	built	five	years	ago,

there	was	an	intense	struggle	for	the	rights	of	the	land	but,	in	the	end,	the	courts ruled	 in	 favor	 of	 the	 small	 band	 of	 natives	 known	 as	 the	 Takala	 tribe,”	 Dillon

explained.	 “After	 that,	 they	 petitioned	 lawmakers	 to	 enact	 laws	 around	 the restriction	of	buying	and	selling	land	in	the	resort	area.	Because	of	these	laws	the only	full-time	residents	of	the	area	were	descendants	of	the	original	Takala	tribe.

They	were	the	ones	who	built,	own,	and	run	the	resort.”

“That’s	 really	 interesting,”	 said	 a	 sarcastic	 Jordan.	 “Lame!	 As	 if	 we	 were interested	in	that!”	he	exclaimed.

“Not	everyone	in	life	focuses	on	video	games	and	girls,”	Claire	put	in,	which

earned	 her	 a	 “death	 look”	 from	 her	 brother.	 Dillon	 looked	 at	 her	 in	 surprise.	 It wasn’t	 usually	 like	 Claire	 to	 stick	 up	 for	 him	 when	 Jordan	 was	 giving	 him	 the gears.	 She	 just	 smiled	 back	 as	 if	 to	 say	 she	 was	 only	 doing	 it	 because	 of	 the opportunity	it	gave	her	to	bug	her	older	brother.

“Well	I	find	it	interesting,”	replied	Mom,	the	eternal	encourager.

Jordan	 rolled	 his	 eyes.	 “You	 think	 everything	 we	 say	 is	 ‘interesting,’”	 he muttered.

“What	was	that,	Jordan?”	his	Dad	asked,	a	warning	look	in	his	eyes.

“Nothing,	Dad,”	Jordan	said,	slinking	lower	in	his	seat.”

The	van	rolled	up	to	the	front	gate	where	they	were	greeted	by	an	attendant

wearing	 a	 really	 flashy	 Hawaiian	 shirt,	 kakis	 shorts,	 and	 flip	 flop	 sandals.	 He was	 a	 younger	 native	 man,	 appearing	 to	 be	 in	 his	 early	 twenties,	 with	 medium length	jet	black	hair,	and	an	infectious	smile.

“Welcome!”	 he	 said	 enthusiastically.	 “I’m	 Troy.	 The	 gate	 keeper.”	 He	 said that	 last	 bit	 about	 being	 the	 gate	 keeper	 in	 a	 lower	 voice,	 trying	 to	 sound dramatic,	then	smiled.

Dad	 was	 taken	 back	 a	 little	 bit	 by	 his	 enthusiasm.	 “Well,	 Troy	 the	 gate keeper.	 I’m	 Bruce	 Hunt	 and	 we	 have	 a	 reservation.”	 Dad	 handed	 him	 the reservation	papers.

“Excellent!”	 Troy	 exclaimed.	 “You	 guy’s	 are	 going	 to	 have	 an	 awesome

time.	He	looked	further	into	the	Van	as	he	scanned	the	papers.

“Let	me	guess	…	You	are	obviously	the	lovely	Lilly	Hunt,”	he	said	looking

to	Mom	who	smiled	back.	“And	you,	my	man	must	be	Dillon.	And	beside	you

has	got	to	be	your	sister	Gwen.”	Gwen	giggled.	Looking	way	in	the	back	of	the

van	 he	 noted	 the	 last	 of	 the	 Hunt	 kids.	 “Ah	 ha!	 You	 must	 be	 Claire.”	 Claire

blushed.	 “And	 the	 eldest	 Hunt	 kid,”	 he	 said	 in	 a	 sophisticated,	 terrible	 British accent,	“Jordan.”	Jordan	nodded,	not	sure	what	to	make	of	this	weird	guy.

“Wow!	Gwen	explained.	“How	did	you	know	who	we	are?”

Troy	 smiled	 “It’s	 as	 I	 said.	 I’m	 the	 gate	 keeper, “	 he	 said	 again	 in	 his	 low voice.	“And	…	this	reservation	has	your	names	and	ages	on	it.”

Dad	laughed.	“Thanks	Troy.”

“No	problem.	Now,	if	you	just	follow	this	road	here	down	to	the	end	you	will

come	smack	dab	into	the	resort	hotel.	From	there	they	will	be	able	to	give	you

any	of	the	information	you	require.	I	hope	you	guys	have	a	fantabulous	time!”

As	the	van	pulled	away	Troy	yelled	after	them,	“See	ya	soon	Hunt	family!”

“Well,	he	was	certainly	an	enthusiastic	guy,”	Mom	noted.

“Enthusiastic?	That’s	an	understatement!”	Jordan	replied.

“I	thought	he	was	awesome!”	Gwen	put	in.

Dillon	 looked	 back	 out	 the	 window	 as	 Troy	 went	 about	 doing	 whatever	 is was	that	he	did	as	 the	gate	keeper.

He	was	a	pretty	cool	guy,	Dillon	thought	to	himself.

The	van	pulled	up	to	the	front	of	the	massive	hotel.	The	family	looked	up	in

amazement	 at	 its	 size.	 They	 also	 noted	 tons	 of	 people	 milling	 around,	 walking down	the	paths,	and	some	sharing	a	coffee	or	a	drink	at	one	of	the	nearby	tables.

As	 they	 got	 out	 they	 noted	 that	 the	 weather	 was	 just	 as	 beautiful	 as	 the surroundings.	It	seemed	cooler	in	the	valley	at	the	resort	than	it	was	in	the	desert.

That	was	probably	due	to	the	greenery	all	around	which	afforded	a	lot	of	shade

from	the	hot	sun.	There	also	seemed	to	be	quite	a	bit	of	humidity	in	the	air.	Not enough	to	soak	your	clothes;	just	enough	to	keep	everything	green	and	cool.	It

was	like	a	garden	of	Eden	in	the	middle	of	nowhere!

As	soon	as	the	van	was	stopped	and	the	Hunts	started	to	get	out,	they	were

greeted	by	two	bellman	and	a	valet.

“Good	afternoon,”	one	of	the	Bellman	said.	He	was	a	tall	gangly	man	with

short	cropped	blonde	hair	and	spoke	with	an	Australian	accent.	“Welcome	to	the

Desert	Oasis	Resort.”

“Thank	you,”	said	Mom	politely.

The	 other	 bellman	 started	 grabbing	 luggage	 from	 the	 back	 of	 the	 van	 and

loaded	 it	 up	 onto	 his	 cart.	 Dad	 handed	 his	 keys	 to	 the	 valet	 and	 in	 no	 time	 the entire	family	was	inside	the	main	lobby	of	the	resort.

The	lobby	was	massive	with	marble	floors	and	a	large	circular	fountain	in	the

middle.	The	fountain	had	a	large	eagle	stature	in	the	middle	of	it.	The	eagle	had its	wings	spread,	was	looking	up	and	seemed	as	though	it	just	broke	through	the

surface	 of	 the	 water	 as	 it	 headed	 skyward,	 and	 it	 had	 water	 spraying	 out	 of	 its mouth.	Dillon	thought	it	looked	as	though	the	bird	was	stuck	in	an	eternal	state of	puking!	Around	the	main	eagle	were	smaller	ones	circling	it.	They	seemed	to

be	suspended	from	the	ceiling	by	tiny	cables	that	could	barely	been	seen.

Mom	 and	 Dad	 went	 to	 the	 front	 desk	 so	 they	 could	 check	 in	 while	 Jordan and	Claire	waited	with	the	bellman	by	the	cart.	Dillon	and	Gwen	walked	around

in	 awe	 of	 the	 place.	 Almost	 the	 entire	 lobby	 was	 made	 of	 granite	 and	 ornate rocks.	There	were	nature	drawings	of	the	Oasis	all	over	the	walls	and	the	smell

of	fresh	spring	water	filled	the	air.	The	air	inside	was	just	as	moist	and	refreshing as	it	was	on	the	outside	with	one	exception:	it	was	cooler	in	the	hotel,	probably due	to	the	central	air	conditioning.

As	 Dillon	 and	 Gwen	 walked	 toward	 the	 front	 desk	 where	 Mom	 and	 Dad

were,	a	curious	drawing	caught	Dillon’s	eye.	There	was	a	large	carved	scene	on

the	wall	behind	the	desk	which	showed	rivers	of	water	flowing	through	the	Oasis

with	all	types	of	animals:	deer,	rabbits,	coyotes,	and	such.	At	the	very	top	corner of	 the	 carving,	 beside	 one	 of	 the	 large	 leafy	 trees	 was	 a	 small	 symbol.	 As Dillon’s	eyes	focused	in	on	it	he	almost	fell	over.	His	face	went	pale	and	he	must have	 had	 a	 shocked	 expression	 on	 his	 face	 as	 he	 felt	 Gwen	 tugging	 at	 his	 arm and	asking	if	he	was	okay.

When	he	came	out	of	his	stunned	silence,	he	shook	it	off	and	looked	down	at

her.	 “I’m	 fine,”	 he	 said	 with	 a	 weak	 smile.	 “I’m	 just	 …	 suddenly	 not	 feeling well.”

Mom	 must	 have	 overheard	 him	 as	 she	 came	 over	 and	 touched	 his	 shoulder reassuringly.	 She	 felt	 his	 forehead	 and	 looked	 at	 his	 eyes.	 “You	 don’t	 feel	 like you	have	a	fever,	and	you	look	fine.	It’ll	be	okay.	We’ll	be	in	our	rooms	shortly and	then	you	can	lay	down	for	a	bit.”

Dillon	 smiled	 again.	 So	 weak	 was	 it	 that	 he	 thought	 for	 sure	 Mom	 would

press	 on	 and	 start	 asking	 questions.	 Thankfully	 she	 didn’t.	 He	 nodded	 slightly and	 glanced	 back	 at	 the	 wall.	 There,	 by	 the	 leaf,	 was	 the	 symbol	 of	 a	 square surrounding	 a	 pentagram	 which	 had	 an	 eye	 in	 the	 center	 of	 it.	 The	 only	 thing missing	from	it	was	the	writing	that	was	surrounding	it.	The	symbol	was	small

and	barely	noticeable,	but	Dillon	noticed	it.	It	was	the	image	from	his	dream!

“You	guys	coming?”	Jordan	hollered.

Dillon	stared,	still	zoned	out	as	he	puzzled	over	the	strange	symbol	he’d	seen

now	in	his	dreams	and	now	in	real	life.

Claire	shook	his	shoulder.	“You	coming?”	she	repeated.

How	could	that	be? Dillon	screamed	in	his	mind.	Then	immediately	he	was struck	by	the	image	again,	seen	at	another	place.	He	now	knew	that	he	must	have

seen	this	image	at	the	information	center	when	he	was	at	the	counter	buying	his

books	from	Tom	Tom.	All	he	knew	was	that	he	shook	it	off	as	being	mistaken.

Maybe	he	wasn’t?

“In	a	minute,”	Dillon	replied.	“What	room	am	I	in?”

“You’re	with	Jordan	in	room	418,”	Dad	responded.	“Everything	okay?”

“Yeah.	I	just	want	to	ask	the	girl	at	the	desk	a	question.	I’ll	be	up	there	right away.”

“You	 can	 ask	 her	 your	 question	 later,”	 Mom	 said	 sternly.	 “Right	 now,	 you need	 to	 lay	 down.	 I’ll	 bring	 some	 ice	 to	 your	 room.	 Maybe	 you’re	 carsick	 or dehydrated.	Some	ice	water	and	rest	will	help	with	both.”

“I’m	 really	 okay	 Mom,”	 Dillon	 replied.	 “I’ll	 only	 be	 a	 minute	 and	 then	 I’ll go	and	lie	down	for	a	bit	until	I’m	feeling	better,”	he	pleaded.	“Promise.”

Mom	looked	at	Dad	for	help.	He	hesitated	for	a	moment,	then	nodded.	“He’ll

be	fine	hun.	It’s	just	for	a	moment.	Don’t	be	too	long,”	he	said	to	Dillon.

Dillon	knew	he	could	always	count	on	Dad	to	give	him	some	much	needed

flexibility.

“Okay,”	conceded	Mom.	“But	you’re	not	to	be	longer	than	you	need	to.”

Jordan,	 overhearing	 the	 exchange	 from	 the	 elevator	 hollered	 over,	 “I	 can’t promise	you’ll	be	able	to	get	in	the	room!”

“Come	on	man.	Toss	your	brother	a	key-card,”	Dad	said	as	he	walked	over	to

the	elevator.

Jordan	sighed,	Dad	having	destroyed	the	fun	he	was	going	to	have	bugging his	brother.	Gwen	giggled.	Jordan	pulled	out	one	of	the	key-cards	and	tossed	it	to Dillon	 which	 fell	 conveniently	 short	 of	 his	 reach.	 Jordan	 smirked	 as	 though	 he just	had	the	last	word	in	the	conversation.

The	 sleight	 didn’t	 phase	 Dillon	 as	 he	 picked	 up	 the	 card	 and	 headed	 to	 the front	desk.	He	had	other	things	on	his	mind.

The	woman	at	the	front	desk	was	about	average	height	with	short	brown	hair.

She	 appeared	 to	 be	 in	 her	 early	 to	 mid	 twenties	 and	 had	 a	 slim	 build	 and	 was quite	pretty.	As	she	worked	away	typing	on	her	computer	her	head	moved	to	and

away	from	the	screen	as	she	copied	whatever	information	she	was	working	on.

When	 Dillon	 approached	 the	 desk	 she	 was	 so	 engrossed	 in	 her	 work	 that	 she didn’t	notice	him	at	first.

“Excuse	me,”	Dillon	said	in	a	soft	voice.	No	response.	“Excuse	me,”	he	said

again,	this	time	a	little	louder.

The	 woman	 seemed	 startled,	 but	 quickly	 collected	 herself.	 “Oh	 …	 sorry

about	that,”	she	said.

“No	problem,”	Dillon	replied.

“What	can	I	do	for	you?”

Dillon	 was	 silent	 for	 a	 moment,	 not	 really	 knowing	 how	 he	 wanted	 to

proceed.	 “I	 was	 just	 wondering,”	 he	 said	 at	 length,	 “what	 is	 that	 symbol	 up	 on the	wall	behind	you?”

The	woman	turned	around	and	scanned	the	wall.	“What	symbol?”	she	asked.

“That	 one	 over	 there	 at	 the	 top	 corner	 of	 the	 leaf,”	 he	 said	 as	 he	 pointed towards	it.

The	woman	looked	to	where	he	was	motioning.	It	took	her	a	moment	but	she

finally	saw	what	he	was	curious	about.	She	looked	closer.	“You	know	…	I’m	not

sure,”	 she	 replied.	 “I’m	 actually	 really	 new	 to	 Oasis	 Resort	 and	 I	 don’t	 come from	 around	 here.”	 She	 turned	 again	 toward	 Dillon.	 “I’m	 from	 Canada!	 The name’s	Janeen,”	she	said	with	a	smile	as	she	stretched	out	her	hand.

“Oh	…	uh	…	I’m	Dillon,”	he	replied	as	the	two	shook	hands.

“How	did	you	even	notice	that?”	Janeen	asked	in	surprise.	“It’s	so	small	and

blends	in	quite	well	with	the	surrounding	carving.”

“I	 guess	 I	 have	 a	 knack	 for	 seeing	 obscure	 stuff.	 I	 also	 don’t	 see	 an	 artist name	anywhere	on	the	wall,”	he	replied	as	he	scanned	the	rest	of	the	carving.

Janeen	 smiled	 again.	 “Hmmm,	 that’s	 weird.	 You	 know	 what,	 Dillon?	 I	 can ask	around	for	you	and	let	you	know	what	I	find	out,	if	anything,”	she	offered.

Dillon	 smiled	 back	 and	 nodded.	 He	 headed	 for	 the	 elevator	 feeling	 a	 little confused	 and	 almost	 sick	 to	 his	 stomach. How	 could	 I	 have	 clearly	 seen	 this symbol	in	a	dream	when	I	had	never	been	here	before,” he	thought	to	himself.

Maybe	 I	 saw	 it	 in	 a	 book	 I	 read,	 or	 from	 some	 info	 on-line	 when	 I	 was researching	 the	 place?	 No,	 he	 realized.	 He	 would	 have	 remembered	 reading about	it	if	he	had.	He	knew	he	couldn’t	dismiss	this.	There	was	something	going

on	here,	and	he	had	to	find	out	what.





9

D I S T U R B I N G 	 T H O U G H T S

Dillon	found	himself	sliding	through	the	dark,	not	knowing	where	he

would	end	up.	He	could	feel	his	back	and	legs	getting	scratched	up	as

he	 tumbled	 down	 the	 rocky	 stairs.	 Fortunately	 he	 didn’t	 seem	 to	 hit

his	 head	 on	 the	 way	 down.	 Then,	 before	 he	 knew	 it,	 the	 stairs	 opened	 up suddenly	into	a	large	cavernous	room	that	was	dimly	illuminated.

Dillon	hit	the	floor	and	rolled	a	few	feet	from	the	mouth	of	the	stairs.	Before

he	fully	got	his	senses	back	he	felt	himself	being	roughly	yanked	from	the	floor.

“Way	to	go	Dil!”	his	brother	yell	at	him.	“You	better	tell	me	what’s	going	on

right	now.”

He	looked	around	stunned.	His	brother	had	a	few	scratches	on	his	face	and

arms.	Fresh	blood	slowly	showed	itself	from	the	many	scrapes.	“Sorry,	but	I	was

more	concerned	about	what	was	chasing	us!”	he	snapped	back.

“Why	did	you	follow	me	anyway?”	Dillon	asked	in	an	accusing	tone.

“Because	 you	 seemed	 so	 adamant	 about	 sneaking	 out	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the night,”	 Jordan	 replied.	 “And	 Mom	 would	 kill	 me	 if	 I	 knew	 you	 were	 doing something	stupid	and	didn’t	do	anything	about	it!”

“Well	…	thanks,”	said	Dillon	as	he	began	to	wipe	himself	off.

“Don’t	mention	it,	numbskull.	Where	do	you	think	we	are	anyway?”

“I	 don’t	 exactly	 know,”	 Dillon	 responded	 as	 he	 started	 to	 look	 around,	 and take	in	more	of	their	surroundings.	As	he	scanned	the	walls	of	the	large	chamber something	caught	his	eye.	He	walked	towards	one	of	the	walls	to	the	side	as	he



reached	in	his	pocket	for	his	cell	phone.	He	turned	the	flashlight	function	on	and shined	it	at	the	wall.	The	light	came	on,	but	immediately	dimmed	and	flickered	a little.	 Dillon	 looked	 at	 his	 phone	 for	 a	 moment,	 trying	 to	 figure	 out	 what	 was happening,	 but	 quickly	 decided	 to	 point	 it	 at	 the	 wall	 before	 his	 battery	 totally died.	There,	etched	into	the	wall	was	a	carving	of	some	sort.	As	he	looked	closer in	the	dim	light	he	almost	fell	over	as	the	picture	that	was	etched	into	the	wall was	the	same	square	with	a	pentagram	inside	of	that	and	an	eye	inside	of	that!

He	 was	 suddenly	 jolted	 from	 his	 thoughts	 as	 Jordan	 smacked	 him	 on	 the shoulder.	Before	he	had	time	to	turn	around	he	felt	another	smack,	then	he	felt

that	he	was	being	shaken	roughly.	He	tried	to	get	away	but	couldn’t.	The	room

began	to	spin	and	fade.

“What	are	you	…”	he	started	to	say	but	couldn’t	get	the	rest	of	the	sentence

out.

“Wake	up	numbskull,”	he	heard	someone	say.

DILLON	 OPENED	 HIS	 EYES	 GROGGILY	 TO	 SEE	 JORDAN	 STANDING	 OVER	 HIM

shaking	his	shoulder.

“Wake	up!”	Jordan	said	again	before	walking	away	into	the	restroom.	“Mom

and	Dad	want	us	ready	for	breakfast	in	fifteen	minutes.”

After	collecting	himself	Dillon	realized	that	he	must	have	had	another	dream.

This	time	it	was	Jordan	that	was	with	him	and	not	Gwen.	It	was	beginning	to	get

weird	with	him	seeing	that	symbol	again.	His	mind	must	be	working	overtime,

he	thought	to	himself.	It	was	probably	due	to	the	carving	of	it	that	he	saw	on	the wall	behind	the	guest	services	desk.	Either	way,	there	was	now	an	intense	desire in	him	to	try	and	find	out	what	that	symbol	meant.

Dillon	shook	off	the	disturbing	thoughts	and	hurried	to	get	ready.	He	quickly

threw	 on	 his	 shorts	 and	 t-shirt.	 The	 two	 quickly	 exited	 the	 room	 and	 ran	 down the	hall	heading	for	the	elevator.	They	saw	the	door	open	up	and	Jordan	dashed

inside.	 Dillon	 quickly	 sidestepped	 through	 the	 door	 leading	 to	 the	 stairs	 as	 he was	determined	to	beat	his	brother.

He	 started	 down	 as	 fast	 as	 he	 dared,	 jumping	 two	 steps	 at	 a	 time.	 He	 and Jordan	 were	 always	 in	 a	 race	 when	 they	 had	 places	 to	 go,	 and	 Dillon	 was determined	that	he	would	beat	the	elevator	down	the	four	flights	of	stairs.	Just	as he	rounded	the	last	corner	down	he	had	to	make	an	emergency	push	to	the	side

as	he	noted,	at	the	last	minute,	a	man	coming	up	the	stairs.	He	wasn’t	able	to	get completely	out	of	the	way	and	crashed	into	the	man’s	shoulder	which	sent	him

flying	into	the	opposite	wall.	He	hit	with	a	thud	and	fell	to	the	floor.

The	man	he	hit	held	tightly	to	the	rail	so	he	didn’t	topple	over.

“Are	you	okay?”	asked	the	man	as	he	rushed	over	to	stand	before	Dillon.

Dillon	 looked	 up	 and	 saw	 a	 man	 about	 six	 feet	 tall	 with	 a	 cleanly	 shaven scalp,	 and	 bright	 blue	 eyes	 staring	 down	 at	 him	 and	 offering	 a	 hand.	 He	 had	 a large	 strange	 looking	 tattoo	 on	 the	 right	 side	 of	 his	 bald	 head	 that	 looked	 like some	sort	of	Asian	writing.	Dillon	hesitate	for	a	moment,	being	taken	off	guard

by	the	striking	look	of	the	man’s	tattoo,	then	grasped	his	hand	and	was	hoisted

easily	to	his	feet.

“There.	That’s	better,”	the	man	said	with	a	smile.	“I’m	Derek.”

Dillon	 smiled	 back.	 “I’m	 Dillon,”	 he	 said.	 “Sorry	 for	 running	 into	 you.	 It’s just	I	…”

Derek	waved	his	hand.	“No	need	to	explain,”	he	said.	“I’m	just	glad	you’re

not	hurt.”

Dillon	 smiled	 and	 nodded	 slightly	 as	 he	 started	 toward	 the	 door	 that	 led	 to the	lobby.	“See	you	around	Derek!”

“Take	care	Dillon,”	Derek	replied	as	he	started	up	the	stairs	again.

Dillon	 opened	 the	 door	 and	 was	 about	 to	 exit	 the	 stairway	 when	 his	 eye caught	a	glimpse	of	something	small	that	was	on	the	ground	in	the	stairwell.	He

quickly	backtracked	and	stooped	down	to	see	what	it	was.	It	looked	like	a	small

souvenir	 coin.	 It	 had	 the	 name	 of	 the	 resort	 on	 the	 one	 side,	 and,	 what	 looked like,	a	picture	of	the	hotel	on	the	other.

“Hey	 Derek,”	 Dillon	 called	 to	 the	 man	 who	 was	 heading	 up	 the	 stairs.	 “Is this	yours?”

Derek	glanced	at	him	and	came	back	down	the	stairs.	As	Dillon	stood	up	he

handed	the	coin	to	him.

“Yes	it	is,”	Derek	replied.	“It	must	have	fallen	out	of	my	pocket	when	we	ran into	each	other.”

After	 handling	 it	 for	 a	 moment	 he	 gave	 it	 back	 to	 Dillon.	 “Why	 don’t	 you keep	it.	I	bought	extra	anyway	from	the	souvenir	shop,	and	they’re	really	not	that expensive.”

“Oh	 …	 okay,”	 Dillon	 replied	 as	 he	 took	 the	 coin	 back	 and	 put	 it	 in	 his pocket.	“Thanks!”	he	said	with	a	smile.

“No	problem.”

Dillon	turned	and	burst	through	the	door,	seeing	Jordan	standing	in	the	hall

before	him	with	a	smug	look	on	his	face.

“I	know,	I	know,	you	won	this	time,”	Dillon	spouted.	“But	can	you	get	to	the

table	 first?”	 he	 asked	 as	 he	 sped	 by	 Jordan	 in	 a	 full-tilt	 run.	 Jordan	 was	 taken initially	off	guard,	but	quickly	responded	to	the	challenge	by	taking	off	after	his brother.	The	two	weaved	around	pedestrian	traffic	and	stationary	objects	as	they sped	 to	 the	 restaurant,	 only	 slowing	 down	 when	 they	 came	 into	 view	 of	 Mom, Dad,	 Claire,	 and	 Gwen	 sitting	 at	 a	 table	 near	 the	 front	 of	 the	 entrance	 to	 the restaurant.

As	they	approached,	Jordan	gave	Dillon	a	quick	shot	in	the	arm	before	they

sat	down.

“What	took	you	guys	so	long?”	Dad	asked.

“Oh	nothing,”	Jordan	responded.	“Just	trying	to	get	sleeping	beauty	here	out

of	bed.	That’s	all.”

Claire	laughed.

“So	what	do	you	guys	think	of	this	place	so	far?”	asked	Mom	from	behind	an

upraised	menu.

That	 comment	 started	 a	 barrage	 of	 discussion	 from	 the	 Hunt	 kids,

particularly	 from	 Gwen,	 who	 was	 always	 hard	 pressed	 to	 keep	 quiet.	 As	 the others	talked,	Dillon	absently	traced	the	symbol	he	had	seen	in	his	dreams	on	the table	with	his	finger.	The	words	of	the	others	washed	over	him,	but	he	couldn’t

concentrate.

“Dillon,	are	you	okay?”	his	Mom	asked.

Dillon	looked	up	in	surprise	and	blinked.	“Uh,	yeah.	Sure.”	He	dropped	his

gaze	 back	 to	 the	 table	 and	 frowned.	 He’d	 even	 drawn	 the	 symbol	 in	 his	 syrup.

He	scribbled	it	out	with	his	fork,	heart	pounding.

When	 he	 looked	 up,	 he	 saw	 his	 mom	 still	 watching	 him.	 He	 winced	 and looked	away.

“What’s	going	on	Dillon?”	his	mom	asked,	concern	etched	on	her	face.

Dillon	shifted	uneasily.	“Nothing,”	he	said.	“I	just	…	didn’t	have	a	very	good

night	sleep.”

Jordan	snorted.	“Please!	I	could	barely	wake	you	this	morning.”

Dillon	shrugged,	not	willing	to	be	goaded	into	another	useless	argument	with

his	brother.

Mom	did	not	look	convinced	but	didn’t	press	the	matter	further.

To	him,	playing	a	character	in	an	adventure	was	one	thing,	but	trying	to	fake

being	 okay	 when,	 in	 fact,	 his	 mind	 was	 a	 mile	 away	 was	 another.	 He	 was disturbed	by	the	events	of	the	last	couple	days,	especially	by	the	dreams	he	was having	 and	 the	 mysterious	 symbol	 that	 kept	 showing	 up.	 He	 knew	 that	 he couldn’t	 tell	 anyone	 about	 the	 dreams	 and	 the	 symbol	 because	 he	 would	 just sound	crazy.	He	felt	that	no	one	would	believe	him;	especially	given	the	fact	that he	always	made	up	all	sorts	of	crazy	stories	that	he	played	out	in	his	adventures.

The	problem	with	this	one	is	that	it	was	real.

“So	 what’s	 the	 plan	 today	 then?”	 Claire	 interjected,	 after	 she	 saw	 that Dillon’s	and	Jordan’s	conversation	was	going	nowhere.

“Oh	I	don’t	know,”	responded	Dad.	“What	do	you	guys	want	to	do	today?	I

for	one	would	like	some	relaxation	by	the	pool.”

Gwen	 perked	 up	 at	 that.	 She	 loved	 swimming.	 Jordan	 and	 Claire	 both

nodded	in	ascent	at	the	idea.

“Sure.	 Sounds	 good	 to	 me,”	 Dillon	 put	 it,	 not	 wanting	 to	 be	 the	 “odd-man out.”

“Okay,	 kids,	 so	 we’re	 doing	 pool	 time	 and	 then	 maybe	 a	 tour	 of	 the	 area, right?”	Mom	asked,	whipping	out	her	phone.	Her	fingers	typed	on	the	keyboard.

The	 kids	 all	 noticed	 how	 Mom	 took	 Dad’s	 suggestion	 of	 pool-time	 and	 then added	a	tour.	That’s	how	Mom	operated.	She	was	always	trying	to	cram	as	much

activity	 as	 she	 could	 into	 their	 vacations.	 It	 was	 never	 enough	 for	 her	 to	 just

relax	 and	 take	 it	 easy.	 The	 kids	 were	 used	 to	 it	 by	 now	 and	 just	 kind	 of	 rolled with	it.

Dad	 rolled	 his	 eyes	 and	 put	 an	 arm	 around	 her	 shoulder.	 “Honey,	 we’re	 on vacation.	We	don’t	need	to	plan	every	minute.”

Mom	scowled	at	Dad.	“But	we	do	need	to	know	where	everyone	is	going	to

be.	What	if	something	happens?”

“Uh-oh,	Mom’s	going	full	CSS	on	us!”	Dillon	said	with	a	grin.

“CSS?”	Gwen	asked.

“Constant	Surveillance	System,”	Dillon	explained.

Mom	 rolled	 her	 eyes	 while	 Jordan	 and	 Claire	 snickered.	 “Better	 safe	 than sorry.	Now,	everyone’s	phones	out.	Let’s	get	this	calendar	synched!”

Dillon	wasn’t	keen	about	spending	time	on	a	tour	of	the	town.	He	wanted	to

explore	 more	 of	 the	 resort	 instead.	 He	 was	 sure	 that	 there	 would	 be	 more potential	clues	to	the	mystery	of	the	symbol	and	he	couldn’t	wait	to	start	hunting for	them.

He	 looked	 over	 to	 Dad.	 “If	 you	 don’t	 mind,	 Dad,	 I’d	 just	 like	 to	 hang	 out here	for	a	bit	today,”	he	said.	“Can	I	pass	on	the	trip	to	town?”

“Are	you	sure?”	he	asked.	“It’s	gonna	be	pretty	cool	exploring	the	town.”

“Ya,	 I’m	 sure,”	 Dillon	 responded.	 “Besides	 we’re	 going	 to	 be	 here	 for	 a while	anyway.	I’ll	have	lots	of	time	to	explore.”

“What	do	you	think	babe?”	Dad	turned	and	asked	Mom.

“Well,	I’m	concerned	that	you’ll	be	here	all	alone.”	She	paused	for	a	moment

before	continuing.	“But	…	I	guess	if	you	stay	on	the	resort	property,	keep	your

phone	 close,	 and	 stay	 in	 populated	 areas	 it	 should	 be	 okay	 as	 long	 as	 you promise	to	stay	out	of	trouble.”

Dillon	smiled.	“Come	on.	What	could	possibly	happen?”

“If	you’re	really	concerned	about	it,	I’ll	stay	here	and	keep	an	eye	on	him,”

Jordan	piped	in.

Mom	smiled.	“Thanks	Jordan.	That	would	ease	my	concern.”

“No	problem.	Always	trying	to	help.”

“Ya	right,”	Claire	said	under	her	breath.

“What	was	that?”	Jordan	snapped	at	her	angrily.

“Oh	 nothing,”	 she	 replied	 innocently.	 “Enjoy	 your	 time	 here	 with	 Dillon.”

She	gave	him	one	of	those	sarcastic	smiles.

Dillon	 just	 shook	 his	 head	 and	 let	 his	 brother	 and	 sister	 go	 at	 it.	 He	 knew when	not	to	get	in	the	middle	of	one	of	their	tiffs.

Instead,	 he	 looked	 down,	 about	 to	 cut	 into	 his	 pancakes,	 when	 he	 saw	 it again.	There,	in	front	of	him	was	the	symbol	he	had	drawn	into	his	syrup	again,

which	shocked	him	more	than	he	thought	it	should	have.	He	had	a	feeling	that	he

was	 losing	 control	 of	 himself	 and	 it	 scared	 him.	 He	 had	 no	 idea	 what	 was happening	to	him,	but	he	knew	he	needed	to	find	out.	He	needed	to	find	out	fast.





10

T H E 	 M A N 	 I N 	 T H E 	 P I C T U R E

After	breakfast	was	done,	and	the	family	enjoyed	a	couple	hours	by	the

pool	 the	 Hunts,	 with	 the	 exception	 of	 Dillon	 and	 Jordan,	 packed	 their day-trip	gear	and	boarded	the	small	shuttle	bus	that	headed	to	town.

“Don’t	forget	to	keep	an	eye	on	your	brother,”	Mom	instructed	Jordan	before

they	left.

“Ya	 ya	 …	 I	 got	 this,”	 Jordan	 replied	 as	 he	 settled	 back	 down	 in	 his	 deck chair.

After	they	left	Dillon	turned	to	his	brother.	“Mom	just	said	you	had	to	keep

an	eye	on	me.”

Jordan	rolled	his	eyes.	“Sure,	I’ll	keep	an	eye	on	you	every	time	you	come	to

the	pool.	And	when	you	do	you	gotta	make	sure	you	stay	away	from	me	so	you

don’t	ruin	my	game!”

“Game?”	Dillon	asked	with	a	snort.	“I	kept	track	of	your	‘game’	on	the	way

down	 here.	 Trust	 me,	 you’re	 better	 off	 with	 me.”	 He	 danced	 out	 of	 the	 way	 as Jordan	aimed	a	punch	for	his	shoulder.

“Just	don’t	tell	mom	and	you	can	do	what	you	want,”	Jordan	said.

Dillon	shrugged.	“Sure	thing.”

In	 truth,	 Dillon	 didn’t	 want	 Jordan	 anywhere	 near	 him	 while	 he	 was

researching	the	symbol.	But	any	opportunity	he	had	in	order	to	get	a	“dig”	in	at his	brother	he	would	take.



DILLON	WAS	DETERMINED	TO	USE	EVERY	POSSIBLE	RESOURCE	HE	COULD	IN	ORDER

to	 find	 out	 about	 this	 symbol.	 He	 was	 actually	 really	 tempted	 to	 relax	 with Jordan	 by	 the	 pool	 as	 he	 did	 have	 a	 sleepless	 night,	 but	 the	 fear	 of	 seeing	 the symbol	again	in	his	dreams	pushed	him	to	pursue	its	meaning	instead.

The	most	likely	place	he	could	think	of	to	start	looking	was	in	his	book	about

John	 Taylor	 Sebastian.	 If	 anyone	 knew	 what	 this	 meant	 it	 would	 definitely	 be him,	he	reasoned	to	himself.	If	that	didn’t	have	anything	then	he	would	look	in

every	book,	brochure,	and	on-line	literature	that	he	could	find	on	the	place.

After	gathering	up	all	the	resources	he	could	find	about	Desert	Oasis	Resort

he	parked	himself	in	the	business	center	which	was	by	the	lobby.	It	was	nice	and quiet	in	that	room	and	there	were	computer	terminals	he	could	access	to	do	his

research.	It	was	perfect!	The	best	part	about	it	was	that	there	were	free	cookies, muffins,	and	fruit	which	were	laid	out	in	the	room	for	those	who	needed	a	snack

while	they	worked	on	whatever	it	was	that	they	were	doing.

Dillon	walked	over	and	grabbed	a	few	nice	big	chocolate	chip	cookies	from

under	the	tray	lid	and	marched	back	to	where	he	had	set	up	“camp.”	He	began

flipping	through	the	book	on	John	Taylor	Sebastian.	As	he	thumbed	through	the

pages	he	scanned	the	text	for	anything	that	would	remotely	describe	the	symbol.

While	looking	at	the	photographs	that	were	in	the	book	of	John,	his	colleagues,

and	some	of	the	surrounding	territory,	he	held	them	up	every	which	way	to	see	if he	could	see	some	sign	of	the	symbol.	Nothing.	He	must	have	looked	for	about

an	hour	through	that	book	but	couldn’t	find	even	a	trace.	He	then	resorted	to	his other	pieces	of	literature	and	then	finally	the	internet.	Nothing.	It	was	incredibly frustrating!

After	 taking	 a	 bit	 of	 a	 break	 to	 stretch	 his	 legs	 and	 grab	 another	 cookie Dillon	 decided	 to	 go	 back	 to	 reading	 the	 book	 on	 John	 Taylor	 Sebastian.	 He flipped	 through	 it	 slowly	 this	 time,	 reading	 more	 of	 the	 text	 in	 detail.	 It	 was actually	kind	of	interesting.	John	apparently	was	a	celebrated	archeologist	before he	 ever	 tried	 to	 discover	 the	 source	 of	 the	 Oasis.	 He	 had	 numerous	 findings	 to his	 name,	 including	 some	 long	 lost	 south	 American	 tribes	 that	 were,	 up	 to	 the

time	he	investigated,	considered	myths.	The	introduction	to	the	book	described him	as	a	strong,	polite,	quiet	man	who	spent	countless	hours	pouring	over	books

in	 search	 of	 some	 missing	 detail	 that	 he	 believed	 would	 unlock	 the	 whole mystery	 of	 what	 he	 was	 researching.	 There	 was,	 however,	 another	 side	 to	 him that	 described	 him	 as	 adventurous	 and	 an	 avid	 outdoorsman.	 Apparently	 he never	married	as	his	work	kept	him	away	from	home	far	too	much.

As	 Dillon	 read	 about	 this	 man	 he	 began	 to	 feel	 as	 though	 he	 knew	 him somehow;	 like	 they	 had	 a	 connection	 that	 was	 seen	 in	 common	 interests.	 Of course	John	had	years	of	study	and	field	experience	to	his	name	while	Dillon	had imaginary	 adventures	 and	 a	 weird	 gift	 for	 finding	 stuff.	 This,	 Dillon	 figured, drew	a	line	of	difference	between	the	two—a	big	line.

As	he	read	on,	he	found	that	John	was	skeptical	about	the	length	of	time	the

Oasis	was	active.	From	what	Dillon	had	researched	on	the	net	earlier	it	said	that the	 Oasis	 was	 formed	 in	 the	 1800’s,	 but	 John	 had	 compelling	 evidence	 that	 it actually	wasn’t	that	long	ago.	He	figured	it	was	only	about	five	to	ten	years	old

—around	2008	to	2013!	Dillon	sat	back	pondering	the	thought.

How	could	this	have	been	kept	such	a	secret	for	so	long?	Was	it	because	it

was	on	private	property? Dillon	thought	to	himself. And	how	come	there	is	very little	 contradictory	 evidence	 to	 these	 facts	 in	 any	 other	 research	 that	 was around?	Unless	someone	was	trying	to	cover	it	up.

John,	 according	 to	 the	 book,	 figured	 just	 that:	 that	 someone,	 for	 whatever reason,	 was	 trying	 to	 keep	 the	 recent	 origin	 of	 the	 Oasis	 a	 secret.	 Dillon	 had heard	 Mom	 and	 Dad	 discuss	 the	 modern	 phenomenon	 of	 misinformation	 that happens	 in	 today’s	 world	 while	 they	 watched	 the	 news	 at	 home.	 They	 always marvelled	at	the	amount	of	contrary	“facts”	that	people	put	out	there,	but	Dillon never	really	understood	that	idea.	To	him,	it	was	just	the	world	he	was	growing

up	in,	and	he	figured	that	it	was	just	life.	Now,	however,	he	was	put	in	a	position where	he	had	to	sort	out	what	was	true	and	what	was	false.	This	now	gave	him	a

better	 idea	 of	 what	 Mom	 and	 Dad	 were	 talking	 about,	 and	 he	 felt	 a	 little frustrated	at	having	to	find	out	what	was	true	and	what	was	false.

Further	pondering	this	Dillon	turned	the	page	as	he	was	reading	and	saw	the

first	picture	that	was	in	the	book.	It	was	a	photo	taken	of	John	and	a	few	others

when	they	arrived	at	the	Oasis	in	2016	to	begin	their	research.	There	were	four men	 and	 a	 woman	 in	 the	 photograph.	 The	 woman	 and	 three	 of	 the	 men	 were apparently	 John’s	 field	 workers	 that	 were	 supporting	 him	 on	 this	 investigation, but	 the	 fourth	 man	 was	 a	 native	 man.	 Everything	 in	 the	 picture	 was	 crisp	 and clear	except	for	this	man’s	face.	It	seemed	that	the	resolution	was	off	on	him,	as if	 the	 camera	 or	 the	 lighting	 was	 somehow	 off, or	 someone	 was	 trying	 to deliberately	mask	who	it	was.	The	bottom	of	the	photo	indicated	that	his	name

was	Tokala	Tenderfoot.

He	went	to	the	computer	and	typed	in	all	of	the	names	on	the	picture	into	the

search	 engine.	 All	 of	 them	 came	 up	 as	 being	 field	 archeologists	 that	 went missing	 the	 same	 time	 John	 did,	 except	 Tokala	 Tenderfoot.	 His	 name	 had	 no reference	 to	 the	 man	 Dillon	 was	 seeing	 in	 the	 picture.	 He	 was	 about	 to	 open another	search	window	when	the	lights	in	the	business	center	flickered	then	went out;	 his	 computer	 screen	 went	 black.	 He	 looked	 around	 wondering	 what	 had happened.

An	 older	 man	 noticed	 the	 confused	 look	 on	 Dillon’s	 face	 and	 said,	 “Don’t worry	 son,	 it’s	 just	 a	 temporary	 blackout.	 The	 power	 will	 be	 back	 on	 any moment.”

Sure	enough,	right	after	he	spoke	the	light	came	to	life	again.

“See?”	the	man	commented.

Dillon	nodded.	“Thanks,”	he	replied,	then	he	went	back	to	the	book	and	tried

to	get	a	better	look.	He	figured	the	computer	would	be	useless	so	he	just	left	it off.	 Then	 he	 had	 an	 idea!	 He	 pulled	 out	 his	 phone	 and	 took	 a	 picture	 of	 the picture	 with	 the	 camera	 app.	 He	 then	 used	 his	 fingers	 to	 zoom	 in	 and	 turn	 the photo	in	different	ways,	trying	to	see	it	in	different	angles.	He	squinted	his	eyes as	he	looked	harder	at	the	picture.	Even	though	it	pixelated	when	he	zoomed	in

he	 was	 able	 to	 make	 out	 more	 detail.	 “That	 looks	 like—”	 His	 mouth	 dropped open	as	he	suddenly	recognized	the	man.	It	was	Tom	Tom!

The	 revelation	 knocked	 him	 back.	 Tom	 Tom	 must	 have	 been	 John’s	 guide

while	he	was	here.	If	anyone	knew	what	had	happened	to	John	he	would!	Dillon

sat	 back	 for	 a	 moment	 trying	 to	 digest	 the	 information.	 “There’s	 something going	on	here,”	he	said	to	himself.



“Eh!”	 came	 a	 call	 from	 the	 older	 man	 at	 one	 of	 the	 computer	 terminals beside	him.	“Did	you	say	something	boy?”

Dillon	blushed	a	little.	“Ah	…	No.	Just	talking	to	myself,”	he	admitted.

It	was	Tom	Tom	who	led	me	to	this	book, he	thought	to	himself. I	wonder	if that	wasn’t	an	accident?

Dillon	 quickly	 packed	 up	 his	 stuff	 and	 headed	 for	 the	 bell	 desk.	 He	 knew now	what	he	had	to	do.

There,	at	the	desk,	was	the	tall	gangly	Australian	who	helped	the	Hunts	with

their	 luggage	 when	 they	 first	 arrived.	 He	 looked	 as	 though	 he	 was	 trying	 to appear	busy,	but	Dillon	could	totally	see	through	him.	He	was	bored	out	of	his

mind!

“Hey	…	um	…	”	Dillon	started	to	say,	trying	to	remember	if	he	ever	did	get

the	guy’s	name	when	they	checked	in.

The	Australian	looked	at	him	then	smiled.	“My	name’s	Keith	mate,”	he	said

in	his	thick	Australian	accent.	“But	everyone	just	calls	me	Aussie.”

“Oh	 …	 okay	 Aussie.	 I	 was	 wondering	 if	 you	 guys	 rented	 Bikes	 around

here?”

“Sure	 thing	 …	 ”	 he	 paused,	 looking	 inquisitive.	 “What	 was	 your	 name

again?”

“Oh	…	Dillon.	Dillon	Hunt.”

“Right!	The	Hunt	family.	Now	I	remember!	If	you	head	about	half	way	down

the	 resort,	 through	 those	 doors	 and	 to	 the	 right	 you	 run	 right	 into	 the	 rental shops.”

“Thanks	man!”	Dillon	replied	as	he	started	off,	hoisting	his	backpack	higher

onto	his	shoulder.	“I	mean, mate,”	he	corrected.

Aussie	smiled	and	waved	goodbye	as	Dillon	exited	the	main	lobby.

AS	 FAR	 AS	RENTAL	 SHOPS	 WENT	 THIS	 PLACE	 WAS	 PRETTY	 AWESOME	 IN	 DILLON’S

estimation.	 There	 were	 tons	 of	 equipment	 and	 outdoor	 games	 that	 could	 be rented;	 from	 boats,	 to	 bikes,	 and	 even	 small	 off-road	 buggies.	 Dillon	 paused	 at

the	buggies	for	a	moment	then	shook	the	thought	away.

Dad	would	kill	me	when	he	saw	the	cost	of	this	added	to	the	bill! 	he	thought to	himself.	No,	he	realized	that	he	could	easily	explain	the	twenty	or	so	dollars	to rent	 a	 bike	 for	 the	 afternoon	 as	 opposed	 to	 the	 mini	 dune	 buggy.	 Still	 …	 he continued	to	imagine	what	it	would	be	like	to	whip	across	the	desert	hills	in	one of	these	bad	boys	as	he	stroked	the	protective	cage	that	gave	the	buggy	its	form and	awesome	look.	Finally	he	was	jolted	back	to	reality	by	a	voice	coming	from

behind	him.

“Can	I	help	you	with	something?”	a	woman	asked.

Dillon	 turned	 around	 to	 see	 an	 older	 native	 lady	 standing	 there	 smiling	 at him.	He	noticed	that	her	name	tag	said	“Tara.”

“Can	I	help	you	find	something?”	she	asked	again	with	that	disarming	smile.

“Ah	 …	 yeah	 …”	 Dillon	 stumbled	 as	 he	 was	 pulled	 back	 into	 reality.	 “I would	like	to	rent	a	bike,”	he	replied.

“Okay.	What	kind	of	bike?”

Dillon	looked	around	the	shop.	“Something	that’s	good	for	the	desert	dunes

just	in	case	I	want	to	do	some	off-roading,”	he	said.	“Something	like	that.”	He

pointed	at	a	stylish	looking	BMX	that	was	hanging	from	the	ceiling	on	a	hook

amidst	 a	 number	 of	 other	 styles	 of	 bikes	 hanging	 in	 the	 same	 row.	 It	 was	 a Redline	 Proline	 Pro	 BMX	 race	 bike.	 It	 was	 similar	 to	 the	 one	 he	 had	 at	 home except	 way	 more	 expensive.	 It	 was	 top-of-the-line,	 made	 with	 the	 best

components,	 and	 was	 super	 light!	 Despite	 some	 of	 the	 other	 kids	 at	 the	 track having	these	bad	boys	he	was	never	able	to	try	one.

“Okay,”	 Tara	 replied	 as	 she	 headed	 around	 the	 desk.	 “I’ll	 get	 my	 helper	 to pull	 it	 down	 for	 you.”	 She	 turned	 and	 yelled,	 “Trent!	 I	 need	 you	 to	 get	 a	 bike down	for	me.”

After	a	moment	a	young	native	boy	about	Dillon’s	age	came	out	of	the	back

room.

“How	would	you	like	to	pay	for	that?”	Tara	asked.

Dillon	held	up	his	room	key.	“Can	I	just	put	it	on	my	room?”

“Sure	 thing,”	 she	 said,	 holding	 out	 her	 hand.	 She	 swiped	 the	 card	 and	 then typed	in	some	numbers	before	handing	the	card	back	to	Dillon.

“Will	there	be	anything	else	for	you?”

“Just	 a	 helmet	 if	 you	 could.	 A	 fully	 enclosed	 BMX	 one	 if	 you	 have	 it,”

Dillon	responded.

“No	problem,”	the	woman	smiled.

After	a	few	moments	the	young	native	boy	handed	Dillon	the	bike.	“Thanks

man,”	Dillon	said.

“No	 problem,”	 the	 young	 boy	 replied.	 “Just	 be	 careful	 of	 what’s	 out	 in	 the desert.	And	make	sure	you’re	back	before	dark.”

Dillon	looked	at	him	curiously.

“What	I	mean	is	that	there’s	snakes	by	day,	coyotes	at	night,	and	other	things

that	you	need	to	avoid.”

“Oh	…	Okay,”	Dillon	replied. Maybe	 I	 should	 have	 read	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 that book	 about	 the	 creatures	 of	 the	 desert	 I	 got	 from	 the	 information	 center, he thought	to	himself.

“Where	are	you	headed	anyway?”	the	boy	asked.

“Just	to	the	information	center.”

“Oh.	It	should	be	a	good	ride	then.	The	path	is	a	little	hilly,	but	it	shouldn’t take	that	long	and	it’s	well	traveled	by	others	who	want	to	experience	the	desert scenery.	Besides,	there	are	a	ton	of	good	jumps	and	smaller	side	trails	that	should make	the	ride	way	more	fun!”	The	boy	smiled	wide	at	that	last	remark.

“Thanks.	What	path?”	Dillon	asked.

“This	one,”	the	boy	responded	as	he	reached	onto	the	counter	and	grabbed	a

small	brochure.	He	unfolded	it	and	handed	it	to	Dillon.	It	was	a	map	of	the	Oasis and	surrounding	area.	On	it	were	a	number	of	trails	through	the	desert.	One	of

the	trails	led	right	to	the	info	center	that	was	a	few	miles	out	of	town.

“If	you	take	the	trail	your	time	will	be	way	better	than	going	on	the	highway.

It	will	take	about	ten	minutes	and	it’s	a	lot	more	fun,”	Trent	said.

“You	enjoy	yourself,”	Tara	said	as	she	handed	Dillon	the	helmet	she	pulled

from	the	counter.	“Just	make	sure	the	bike’s	back	by	the	end	of	the	day	or	we’ll have	to	charge	you	for	another	full	day,”	she	warned.

“No	problem.	End	of	the	day.	Got	it.	Avoid	dangerous	creatures.	Got	it.	Have

fun	and	take	lots	of	jumps.	Got	it!”	he	responded	as	he	exited.





11

T O M 	 T O M 	 A N D 	 J O H N 	 T A Y L O R 	 S E B A S T I A N

Dillon	was	amazed	at	the	clear	dividing	line	between	where	the	Oasis

ended	and	the	desert	started.	He	noticed	it	on	the	way	in,	but	it	had	a

different	 impact	 on	 him	 now	 that	 he	 was	 biking	 through	 it.	 It	 was

almost	 as	 though	 there	 was	 some	 sort	 of	 invisible	 wall	 between	 the	 lush	 green ground	 and	 the	 rocky,	 sandy,	 sterile	 land.	 As	 Dillon	 rode	 across	 “the	 line”	 he looked	up	and	down	the	distance	of	the	lush	green	land.	The	Oasis	was	huge!	It

went	in	each	direction	for	quite	a	few	miles	he	estimated	and	then	turned	back

toward	the	way	he	came.	And	it	wasn’t	just	a	straight	line,	it	zigged	and	zagged, but	everywhere	it	turned	there	was	definitely	a	clear	line	of	separation	between the	Oasis	and	the	desert.

As	 he	 continued	 down	 the	 rocky	 trail	 on	 his	 BMX	 he	 remembered	 reading that	the	really	weird	thing	about	the	Oasis	is	that	it	never	grew	or	diminished	in the	few	years	it	had	been	around.	This	information	came	directly	from	personal

testimony	of	the	people	who	lived	here.	Of	course	no	one	who	was	an	outsider

really	 knew	 for	 sure	 as	 the	 tribal	 owners	 had	 been	 pretty	 protective	 of	 letting others	on	their	land	in	order	to	conduct	tests.	As	a	matter	of	fact	the	books	Dillon was	reading	seemed	to	indicate	that	John	Taylor	Sebastian	was	the	only	one	with

almost	 unlimited	 access	 to	 the	 resort	 in	 order	 to	 carry	 out	 his	 investigations.	 It wasn’t	really	clear	why	John	Taylor	Sebastian	was	the	only	one	with	this	kind	of access.	 What	 was	 clear	 was	 that	 he,	 and	 members	 of	 his	 team,	 were	 the	 only ones	to	have	gone	missing.	Dillon’s	gut	told	him	that	there	was	a	connection	to

this;	he	just	didn’t	know	what	that	was	yet.

The	 trail	 to	 the	 information	 center	 was	 just	 as	 awesome	 as	 the	 boy	 at	 the rental	place	said	it	would	be.	The	suspension	on	the	BMX	was	put	to	the	test	as

Dillon	 pounded	 over	 the	 hard	 rocky	 surface	 and	 dipped	 down	 into	 the	 low gullies.	 He	 got	 air	 more	 than	 enough.	 And	 the	 speed	 he	 could	 get	 at	 certain points	was	amazing!	He	was	truly	in	his	element.

As	he	flew	over	the	next	jump	he	started	to	picture	himself	riding	a	futuristic

motorcycle	 that	 used	 antigravity	 technology	 to	 keep	 it	 just	 above	 the	 ground.

The	desert	track	suddenly	turned	into	a	concrete	highway	in	his	mind’s	eye.	He

found	himself	cruising	by	other	cars	and	bikes	at	250	miles	per	hour.	The	rush

was	incredible!

He	looked	to	his	belt	and	noted	the	MX1500	machine	pistol	strapped	there.

For	 now,	 he	 was	 Agent	 Dexter	 Malone	 of	 the	 Twilight	 City	 Central	 Police Department	 (TCCP).	 He	 looked	 forward	 again	 and	 saw	 the	 woman	 he	 was

hunting	down:	Deborah	Gale,	also	known	as	The	Night	Hawk.

The	TCCP	had	been	trying	to	catch	The	Night	Hawk	for	months	as	she	was

wanted	for	multiple	charges	of	robbery	and	murder,	most	notably	the	robbery	of

Princeton	Techs	newest	invention,	a	super	soldier	serum	known	as	Weapon	10.

Word	 was	 that	 she	 was	 going	 to	 sell	 it	 to	 the	 highest	 bidder	 on	 the	 dark	 web.

With	that	serum	in	the	wrong	hands,	the	world	would	be	plunged	into	chaos.

Malone	couldn’t	let	that	happen.

He	 jammed	 the	 bike	 into	 a	 higher	 gear	 and	 hit	 the	 accelerator	 to	 max.	 His bike	roared	and	took	off.	The	Night	Hawk	looked	back	and	saw	Malone	catching

up.	 She	 reached	 down,	 drew	 her	 gun	 from	 its	 holster,	 and	 started	 firing	 at	 the daring	Agent.

Malone	swerved	and	veered,	all	the	while	keeping	his	eye	on	the	target.	He

ducked	in	and	out	of	traffic	with	deadly	precision.

“Put	the	weapon	down,	and	surrender,”	Malone	said,	his	helmet	amplifying

his	voice	so	that	she	could	hear	him.	“You	have	one	chance,”	he	warned.

The	only	response	he	received	was	her	jamming	down	on	the	accelerator	and

pulling	away	from	him.

He	smiled.	“Good.	This	should	be	fun,”	he	said	to	himself.

With	lighting	speed	he	pulled	his	MX1500	and	fired	a	single	shot.	The	bullet grazed	The	Night	Hawk’s	hand	and	drove	into	the	accelerator.	Her	bike	started	to slow	 instantly	 as	 she	 retracted	 her	 hand,	 obviously	 in	 pain.	 As	 Malone	 quickly neared	her	he	leaped	from	the	seat,	keeping	both	his	hands	on	the	handle	bars,

and	spun	both	his	legs	around,	kicking	her	in	the	side	which	sent	her	flying	from her	bike.

He	 smiled	 again,	 knowing	 that	 there	 was	 no	 way	 The	 Night	 Hawk	 was

getting	away	from	him.

Before	Dillon	could	finish	his	imaginary	adventure	he	came	into	view	of	the

back	 side	 of	 the	 info	 center.	 He	 cleared	 his	 head,	 and	 came	 back	 to	 reality, parking	his	bike	off	to	the	side	and	went	right	to	the	front	door.	He	stopped	for	a moment	and	looked	around.	It	was	eerily	quiet	as	there	didn’t	seem	to	be	anyone

around.	He	noted	two	vehicles	in	the	parking	lot	but	other	than	that	there	was	not a	 trace	 of	 anyone,	 or	 anything	 else,	 except	 for	 the	 odd	 tumble	 weed	 here	 and there	blowing	across	the	highway.	He	shrugged	it	off	and	pushed	on	the	door.	It

didn’t	open.	He	tried	again	but	realized	that	it	was	locked.	He	looked	at	the	hours of	operation	sign	and	noted	that	the	place	should	be	open	right	now.

Dillon	 got	 a	 shiver	 down	 his	 back.	 He	 knew	 something	 was	 wrong.	 He

looked	around	for	a	moment	and	pressed	his	face	up	against	the	glass,	trying	to

get	a	look	of	what	was	going	on	inside	if	he	could.	Everything	seemed	quiet.

Maybe	I’m	overreacting? he	thought	to	himself. Right	…	In	the	middle	of	the day	with	two	vehicles	parked	out	front	when	the	store	hours	clearly	indicate	that it’s	 supposed	 to	 be	 open	 and	 it’s	 not	 even	 lunch	 yet.	 It’s	 all	 just	 a	 little	 too suspicious.

He	moved	to	the	side	and	around	the	building	searching	for	another	way	in.

He	found	a	side	door	but	that	too	was	locked.	As	he	moved	around	he	noticed	a

window	about	six	feet	off	the	ground	that	was	wound	open	about	ten	inches.	It

was	clearly	too	small	an	opening	for	most	people,	but	fortunately	Dillon	was	still only	twelve	and	hadn’t	filled	out	yet.	He	figured	he	could	fit	through	if	he	could get	a	boost.	He	searched	around	a	little	more	and	found	a	garbage	can	that	would be	perfect	for	him	use.

Before	he	proceeded	any	further	he	decided	that	he	should	probably	look	up

the	 phone	 number	 and	 see	 if	 anyone	 would	 pick	 up	 first.	 He	 wasn’t	 keen	 on breaking	 and	 entering	 and	 figured	 he	 should	 try	 this	 first.	 The	 phone	 rang	 and rang	until	the	voicemail	engaged.

“Hi.	 Thanks	 for	 calling	 the	 Desert	 Oasis	 Information	 Center,”	 a	 woman’s voice	said.	“Our	hours	of	operation	are	from	8	AM	to	8	PM,	Monday	to	Friday,

and	 8	 AM	 to	 5	 PM	 on	 Saturday	 and	 Sunday.	 If	 you	 would	 like	 to	 leave	 a message	please	do	so	after	the	tone.	Thank	you.”

Dillon	hung	up.	It	should	be	open	right	now.	That	knowledge	gave	Dillon	a

sinking	 feeling.	 He	 didn’t	 want	 to	 believe	 it,	 but	 he	 started	 to	 think	 that something	was	wrong.	He	needed	to	get	inside.

After	 positioning	 the	 trash	 can,	 he	 hoisted	 himself	 up.	 Before	 entering	 he took	off	his	backpack	and	squeezed	it	through	the	window.	He	kept	a	firm	hold

on	the	bag	as	he	squirmed	through,	not	wanting	it	to	make	any	noise	inside	the

building	 if	 he	 let	 it	 drop	 to	 the	 floor.	 About	 halfway	 through	 he	 paused	 for	 a moment	and	listened	while	he	looked	around	inside	the	room,	just	to	make	sure

no	 one	 was	 there.	 Even	 for	 him	 the	 fit	 through	 the	 window	 was	 tight!	 But	 he somehow	 managed	 to	 get	 through	 anyway.	 Once	 inside	 he	 quickly	 looked

around	 and	 tried	 to	 get	 his	 bearings.	 He	 apparently	 snuck	 into	 the	 small	 coffee room	that	the	employees	used	for	their	break	times.	There	were	a	couple	tables,

some	chairs,	a	counter	with	a	coffee	pot	on	it,	a	fridge	in	the	corner,	and	a	small flat	screen	TV	hanging	on	the	wall.

Dillon	 noticed	 the	 half-opened	 door	 directly	 across	 from	 where	 he	 had

entered	the	room.	He	crept	silently	to	the	door	and	slowly	peeked	his	head	out,

looking	both	ways	down	the	adjoining	hallway	to	see	if	anyone	was	there.	It	was

empty.	 As	 he	 moved	 from	 the	 room	 he	 heard	 some	 muffled	 speaking	 coming from	down	the	hall.	Slowly	he	walked	toward	the	muffled	conversation,	careful

to	watch	every	footfall	so	as	not	to	alert	anyone	to	his	presence.

As	 he	 neared	 the	 end	 of	 the	 hallway	 he	 could	 hear	 the	 conversation

becoming	 more	 clear.	 He	 definitely	 recognized	 one	 of	 the	 voices.	 It	 was	 Tom Tom.

“I	 told	 you	 before.	 I	 don’t	 know	 what	 happened	 to	 him!”	 Tom	 Tom	 stated emphatically.

“I	don’t	think	you	realize	what	danger	exists	here,”	the	other	man	replied.

Dillon	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 think	 that	 the	 other	 man’s	 voice	 seemed	 familiar somehow	but	he	just	couldn’t	place	it.

“I	know	very	well	what	these	people	are	capable	of	and	…	”

“That’s	 why	 you	 refuse	 to	 give	 me	 the	 information	 I	 need,”	 the	 other	 man finished.

“No	 …	 no	 …	 it’s	 not	 that.	 Listen,	 if	 I	 could	 help	 you	 I	 would,”	 Tom	 Tom replied.	“John	was	my	friend.	I	never	wanted	anything	bad	to	happen	to	him.”

“So	you	say.”

“Yes!	 Of	 course!	 How	 dare	 you	 accuse	 me	 of	 helping	 to	 harm	 my	 friend!”

Tom	Tom	cried	in	rage.

“So	he’s	been	harmed?”	the	man	questioned	slyly.

“No!	 I	 didn’t	 mean	 …	 I	 don’t	 know	 …	 You’re	 confusing	 me,”	 Tom	 Tom

said.	“Please,	just	leave.”

“Not	until	you	start	being	straight	with	me!”	the	man	said,	raising	his	voice

for	effect.

Dillon	thought	for	sure	that	a	fight	was	about	to	break	out.	Out	of	instinct	he

looked	around	for	an	escape	route	just	to	make	sure	he	could	run	to	safety	before calling	for	help.

“I	am	being	straight	with	you,”	he	heard	Tom	Tom	reply	in	a	barely	audible

voice.	 Quiet	 sniffles	 followed	 Tom	 Tom’s	 statement.	 A	 moment	 later,	 Dillon heard	someone	blowing	their	nose.	He	could	almost	feel	the	tears	welling	up	in

the	old	man’s	eyes.	A	long	awkward	silence	ensued.

“Okay,”	 replied	 the	 other	 man	 finally.	 “But	 if	 you	 hear,	 see,	 or	 suddenly remember	 anything	at	all,	please	give	me	a	call.”

Dillon	heard	footsteps	coming	toward	the	hallway	where	he	was.	He	quickly

shuffled	 back	 the	 way	 he	 had	 come	 and	 tucked	 into	 the	 coffee	 room	 again, hiding	around	the	partially	opened	door.	He	could	hear	the	footsteps	get	louder

until	they	were	right	at	the	door.	Then	they	stopped.	Dillon	could	hear	his	heart pound.	It	felt	as	though	his	chest	was	going	to	explode.	He	didn’t	dare	breathe.

Then	the	steps	moved	on.	Dillon	let	out	a	sigh	of	relief.	He	knew	he	should	have tried	to	get	a	look	at	who	it	was	that	was	arguing	with	Tom	Tom,	but	he	couldn’t

move.

After	a	moment	he	was	able	to	finally	collect	himself	and	came	back	out	of

the	room.	“Okay,”	he	said	to	himself.	“You	can	do	this.	You	can	do	this.”

He	 heard	 the	 front	 door	 to	 the	 info	 center	 open	 and	 close;	 the	 distinctive chimes	on	the	door	ringing	out	from	the	movement.	Now	that	the	other	man	was

gone	Dillon	didn’t	feel	the	need	to	employ	as	much	stealth	as	he	had	before,	so

he	hurried	down	the	hall	and	into	the	room	where	Tom	Tom	was.

Even	though	he	had	only	met	Tom	Tom	once,	he	had	a	strange	feeling	that	he

could	trust	the	guy.	Maybe	it	was	his	boyhood	naiveté?	He	wasn’t	sure,	but	he

felt	 driven	 to	 know	 what	 happened	 to	 John	 and	 he	 needed	 Tom	 Tom’s	 help.

Despite	 the	 fact	 that	 he	 just	 overheard	 a	 conversation	 where	 Tom	 Tom	 denied knowing	where	John	was,	he	still	felt	there	was	information	the	old	man	could

share	that	might	shed	some	light	on	this	mystery.

The	 back	 room	 was	 large	 and	 full	 of	 various	 merchandise—boxed	 and

otherwise.	 Dillon	 noticed	 that	 there	 was	 a	 large	 table	 near	 the	 back	 with	 three chairs	 scattered	 around	 it	 in	 no	 organized	 fashion.	 As	 he	 entered	 the	 room	 he immediately	saw	Tom	Tom	leaning	over	the	table	with	his	hands	firmly	planted

against	it.	He	appeared	to	be	mumbling	to	himself.	Tom	Tom	shot	his	head	up,

alerted	to	Dillon’s	presence	when	he	entered	the	room.	The	old	man’s	eyes	were

red	and	teary.	He	looked	confused	when	he	saw	Dillon	standing	there	looking	at

him.

“What	are	you	doing	here?”	he	asked.

“Oh	 …	 I	 …”	 Dillon	 stumbled	 for	 a	 reply.	 It	 was	 as	 though	 all	 of	 his confidence	left	him	at	once	and	he	couldn’t	think	of	a	good	answer	to	give	the

clearly	shaken	man.	“I	…”	he	tried	again.

“Well?”	Tom	Tom	pressed	more	forcefully.

“I	 just	 wanted	 to	 ask	 you	 some	 questions,”	 Dillon	 blurted,	 realizing	 at	 that moment	that	he	should	have	prepared	himself	more	for	this	meeting.	It	also	just

dawned	 on	 him	 that	 he	 was	 just	 about	 to	 ask	 Tom	 Tom	 about	 John	 Taylor Sebastian,	which	was	no	doubt	the	same	John	the	man	who	the	previous	guy	just

asked	 him	 about	 which	 was	 the	 very	 conversation	 that	 made	 Tom	 Tom	 visibly shaken	and	upset. How	Stupid! 	he	thought	to	himself.

“About	what?”	Tom	Tom	asked	sceptically.	“How	much	did	you	hear?”

Dillon	froze	and	the	blood	drained	from	his	face.	A	huge	lump	welled	up	in

his	throat.	He	didn’t	know	what	to	say.

“What	does	it	matter	anyway?”	a	resigned	Tom	Tom	finally	said	at	length	as

he	sat	down	in	the	chair	closest	to	him.	“What	are	you	curious	about	Mr.	Hunt?”

Dillon	relaxed	at	that	and	moved	closer,	grabbing	a	seat	across	from	the	old

man.	 “I	 was	 reading	 up	 on	 …	 ”	 he	 began	 but	 then	 paused,	 not	 sure	 how	 Tom Tom	would	take	the	next	statement,	“	…	on	John	Taylor	Sebastian	and	…	”

“And	you	want	to	know	how	much	I	knew	him?”	the	old	man	cut	in.

“Well	I	saw	a	picture	of	him	and	his	team	in	the	book	I	purchased	from	your

store	and	noticed	that	you	were	in	it,”	Dillon	stated.

Tom	Tom’s	shoulders	shrunk	a	little.	“Yes	I	knew	him,”	he	said.	“He	was	my

friend.	Not	that	they	would	believe	me,”	he	finished,	waving	a	hand	at	the	door

to	indicate	the	man	who	had	just	left.

Dillon	looked	from	the	door	back	to	Tom	Tom.	“Who	are	 they?	he	asked.

“Aren’t	 you	 a	 little	 young	 to	 be	 asking	 such	 questions?”	 Tom	 Tom	 put	 in.

“Shouldn’t	you	be	enjoying	yourself	with	your	family	and	the	other	kids	at	the

resort?”

“I	 would,	 but	 I	 can’t	 get	 the	 thought	 of	 John	 Taylor	 Sebastian	 and	 the mystery	 he	 was	 investigating	 out	 of	 my	 mind.	 It’s	 as	 though	 I	 am	 driven	 for some	 reason	 to	 help	 uncover	 what	 has	 happened	 here.”	 Dillon	 paused	 for	 a moment.	“I	can’t	explain	it,”	he	finally	said	in	a	soft	voice.

“Dillon,	you’re	just	a	boy!”	Tom	Tom	exclaimed,	almost	pleading	with	him.

“You	 shouldn’t	 be	 asking	 these	 questions	 or	 worried	 about	 these	 events.	 They happened	 and	 no	 one	 can	 change	 that.	 Others	 three	 times	 your	 age	 have	 come here	 and	 failed	 to	 find	 what	 they	 were	 looking	 for.	 What	 makes	 you	 think	 you can	crack	this	when	they	haven’t	been	able	to?”

Dillon	was	hit	hard	by	Tom	Tom’s	words.	Up	to	this	point	he	never	thought

that	he	couldn’t	do	what	others	failed	to	do.	He	seemed	to	possess	a	confidence

that	was	innate—apart	from	age,	circumstance,	or	training.	It	had	never	occurred to	 him	 until	 now	 that	 he	 was	 way	 over	 his	 head. Maybe	 Tom	 Tom	 is	 right, he thought	to	himself. Maybe	I	should	just	go	and	be	a	kid;	have	fun	at	the	resort

and	forget	all	this	nonsense?

“I	don’t	know,”	he	said	in	a	barely	audible	tone.

He	was	about	to	turn	and	walk	away	when	Tom	Tom	said,	“I	can’t	tell	you

much	 Dillon.	 I	 warned	 John	 that	 the	 investigation	 was	 dangerous	 but	 he wouldn’t	listen	to	me.”

Dillon	thought	for	a	moment.	“Dangerous	how?”	he	pressed.

“I	 can’t	 explain	 it,	 and	 you	 need	 to	 drop	 it	 as	 well,”	 Tom	 Tom	 said	 firmly.

“No	one	else	is	going	to	get	hurt	because	of	this,”	he	vowed.	“This	is	dangerous in	the	way	that	experienced	explorers	have	gone	missing	…	never	to	be	heard	of

again.	Do	you	want	your	family	going	home	without	you,	never	knowing	what

happened	to	you?”

Dillon	swallowed	hard	as	a	chill	went	down	his	back.	He	hadn’t	reasoned	it

out	that	way	yet.	What	if	the	old	man	was	right?	He	couldn’t	deny	the	logic	of	it.

Tom	Tom	must	have	noticed	the	look	in	Dillon’s	face	as	the	revelation	struck

him.	“Go	and	enjoy	your	vacation	Dillon,”	he	said	softly.

Dillon	 nodded	 slightly.	 He	 was	 about	 to	 leave	 but	 knew	 he	 had	 to	 ask	 one more	question.	“What	do	you	know	about	a	symbol	that	is	shaped	like	a	boxed-in	pentagram	with	an	eye	in	the	middle	of	it?”

Tom	 Tom	 looked	 hard	 at	 Dillon	 for	 a	 moment	 then	 said,	 “I	 don’t	 know anything	about	that.	I’ve	never	seen	anything	like	that	before.”

Dillon	 nodded,	 then	 headed	 for	 the	 door.	 He	 wasn’t	 sure	 if	 Tom	 Tom	 was telling	 the	 truth,	 but	 he	 knew	 he	 wasn’t	 going	 to	 get	 anything	 else	 out	 of	 the man.

He	 suddenly	 stopped	 before	 leaving	 and	 looked	 back	 at	 the	 emotionally

battered	 man.	 “Answer	 me	 honestly,”	 he	 said.	 “Do	 you	 know	 how	 this	 Oasis came	into	being?”

Tom	Tom	looked	at	him	in	the	eyes.	“No,”	he	replied.	“Me	and	the	rest	of	the

tribe	were	enlisted	just	before	the	resort	was	built.	We	were	convinced	that	the Oasis	 was	 naturally	 occurring	 and	 were	 promised	 jobs	 and	 financial	 stability.

The	tribal	leaders	showed	us	a	model	of	what	they	wanted	to	do	for	this	area	and it	excited	us.

“Our	 tribe	 was	 suffering	 and	 we	 wanted	 a	 sense	 of	 well-being	 and

accomplishment	so	we	went	along	without	asking	any	questions.	We	trusted	the elders	 and	 their	 business	 partners	 who	 made	 the	 proposal	 to	 us.	 It	 wasn’t	 until John	came	here	and	started	asking	questions	that	I	too	got	curious,	but	of	course no	one	would	tell	us	anything	than	what	they	already	had.”

“Who	were	the	business	partners?”

“I	 don’t	 know,”	 replied	 Tom	 Tom.	 “Everything	 seemed	 legit,	 so	 we	 didn’t press	for	details.”

“Did	John	tell	you	why	he	was	investigating	the	origin	of	the	Oasis?”

“No.	 He	 never	 fully	 revealed	 his	 intent,	 but	 I	 got	 the	 sense	 that	 there	 were some	shady	circumstances	surrounding	it.	Before	I	had	a	chance	to	pry	any	more

out	of	him	he	disappeared.	It	was	then	that	I	realized	there	was	more	going	on

here	 than	 the	 leaders	 let	 us	 know.	 I	 tried	 to	 talk	 to	 them,	 but	 they	 more	 or	 less implied	that	people	who	ask	too	many	question	tend	to	go	missing.”	Tom	Tom

wiped	a	tear	from	his	eye.

Dillon	nodded	then	turned	and	walked	through	the	door.

He	 headed	 down	 the	 hallway	 and	 into	 the	 main	 lobby	 of	 the	 information center.	As	he	walked	by	the	front	counter	something	caught	his	eye.	He	glanced

over	 and	 saw	 the	 reflection	 of	 a	 familiar	 looking	 symbol	 bouncing	 off	 some aviator-style	sunglasses	that	were	hanging	on	a	rack	on	the	counter.	He	walked

over	 and	 around	 the	 rack	 and	 there,	 etched	 into	 the	 wood	 of	 the	 inside	 of	 the counter	 opposite	 the	 glasses	 was	 the	 all-too-familiar	 square	 shape	 with	 a pentagram	inside	of	it	with	a	single	eye	in	the	middle	of	that.	Dillon	was	rocked back	on	his	heels	and	the	hairs	on	the	back	of	his	neck	stood	up.

“Tom	Tom	 was	 lying	about	this,”	he	whispered	to	himself.	“He	had	to	know this	was	here!”

He	 turned	 around	 quickly	 and	 started	 toward	 the	 hallway	 again	 but	 froze.

There,	 in	 front	 of	 the	 hallway	 was	 a	 large	 coyote	 with	 yellow	 glowing	 eyes, staring	at	him.	It	bared	its	fangs	as	thick	saliva	dripped	from	its	mouth.





12

C O Y O T E S

The	coyote	lunged.	Dillon	barely	managed	to	get	out	of	the	way.	It

slammed	into	a	rack	of	clothing	and	got	hung	up	for	a	moment.	Dillon

pulled	 himself	 off	 the	 floor	 and	 frantically	 looked	 for	 something	 to

defend	 himself	 with.	 The	 coyote	 extracted	 itself	 and	 lunged	 again.	 Dillon managed	to	throw	another	rack	of	clothing	in	its	way.	The	impact	pushed	Dillon

aside	and,	as	he	fell,	he	felt	a	long	hard	object	beside	him	as	he	scrambled	along the	floor.	He	realized	at	that	moment	that	it	was	a	broom.	As	he	got	his	bearing again	he	grabbed	onto	the	broom	and	shot	it	out	in	front	of	him	just	in	time.	The coyote	bit	down	on	the	wooden	shaft.	It	was	only	inches	from	his	face.	He	could

smell	its	foul	rotten	breath.

A	 small	 drop	 of	 saliva	 dripped	 from	 its	 mouth	 onto	 Dillon’s	 hand.	 Oh	 it burned!	 Dillon	 could	 feel	 the	 pain.	 He	 screamed	 out.	 With	 all	 his	 strength	 he pushed	the	broom	to	the	side	and	squirmed	out	from	underneath	the	creature.	As

it	 went	 to	 reposition	 its	 grip	 on	 the	 shaft	 Dillon	 yanked	 it	 from	 its	 mouth	 and swung	 it	 quickly	 around,	 slamming	 the	 creature	 in	 the	 face.	 The	 shock	 of	 the blow	 from	 the	 hit	 jarred	 the	 broom	 from	 his	 hand	 and	 it	 fell	 to	 the	 side.	 The coyote	 also	 flew	 to	 the	 side	 from	 the	 impact.	 As	 it	 struggled	 to	 get	 up	 again Dillon	turned	and	ran	for	the	hallway	as	quickly	as	he	could.	He	knew	he	didn’t

have	time	to	pick	up	the	broom	as	the	creature	appeared	to	be	starting	to	recover already.	He	also	knew	he	had	to	warn	Tom	Tom	and	couldn’t	spare	a	second.

He	 raced	 down	 the	 hall	 as	 fast	 as	 his	 legs	 would	 carry	 him.	 He	 could	 hear

that	 the	 creature	 had	 collected	 its	 senses	 again	 and	 was	 in	 pursuit.	 As	 Dillon neared	 the	 end	 of	 the	 hallway	 he	 spun	 into	 the	 room,	 bouncing	 a	 little	 off	 the door	frame	as	he	couldn’t	enter	the	room	cleanly	because	of	the	momentum	he

had	gained	from	the	run.	He	sprawled	into	a	couple	of	boxes	and	then	onto	his

back.	He	saw	the	coyote	slam	into	the	wall	at	the	end	of	the	hallway	as	it	leaped for	him	just	as	he	turned	into	the	room.	Its	ugly	face	went	through	the	drywall

and	 it	 landed	 hard	 on	 the	 ground.	 Dillon	 didn’t	 wait	 to	 see	 if	 it	 was	 dead.	 He scrambled	back	away	from	the	door,	turned	as	he	went,	and	jumped	to	his	feet.

His	 heart	 sank	 as	 he	 saw	 the	 smashed	 boxes	 and	 overturned	 table	 of	 the room.	It	was	clear	that	something	happened	to	Tom	Tom,	but	there	was	no	sight

of	 the	 old	 man.	 Dillon	 didn’t	 have	 time	 to	 think	 more	 about	 it	 as	 he	 heard	 the creature	 behind	 him	 again	 and	 just	 knew	 that	 it	 was	 coming	 for	 him	 without mercy.	 He	 went	 further	 into	 the	 room	 in	 search	 of	 the	 back	 door	 he	 knew	 was there.	 He	 had	 seen	 the	 door	 when	 he	 first	 pulled	 up	 to	 the	 center	 on	 his	 bike earlier	 and	 was	 determined	 to	 escape	 through	 it.	 He	 glanced	 back	 and	 saw	 the creature	 coming	 into	 the	 room	 just	 as	 he	 dove	 behind	 the	 overturned	 table.	 He landed	 hard	 on	 his	 back	 which	 winded	 him	 a	 little,	 but	 he	 shook	 that	 off, knowing	that	he	had	bigger	problems	to	worry	about	at	the	moment.

Dillon	heard	boxes	being	thrown	around	and	a	low	growl	as	the	creature	was

trying	to	pin	point	his	location.	He	rolled	over,	got	to	his	knees,	and	peeked	his head	out	a	little.	He	saw	the	back	end	of	the	coyote	slip	behind	some	boxes	at	the far	end	of	the	room.	He	knew	he	had	to	make	a	run	for	it,	but	his	one	leg	shook

so	bad	from	the	sheer	fright	of	the	situation	that	he	didn’t	think	he	could	make	it.

He	grabbed	it	with	his	hand	and	tried	to	calm	himself	down	by	breathing	deeply

a	couple	of	times.	The	rattling	of	the	boxes	was	getting	more	feint	which	Dillon took	 as	 a	 sign	 that	 the	 coyote	 was	 further	 away	 now.	 Slowly	 he	 stood	 and	 tip-toed	toward	where	he	figured	the	back	door	was.	He	made	it	around	some	more

boxes	 and	 racks	 and	 saw	 the	 door	 about	 ten	 feet	 away.	 As	 he	 got	 closer	 he suddenly	heard	a	rustling	sound	as	boxes	and	other	items	were	being	pushed	out

of	 the	 way.	 He	 looked	 to	 the	 left	 and	 could	 see	 items	 being	 thrown	 aside	 and could	 tell	 that	 the	 coyote	 was	 quickly	 closing	 in	 on	 him.	 He	 knew	 he	 had	 to make	a	run	for	it.

Dillon	 lunged	 for	 the	 door.	 He	 turned	 the	 handle	 but	 found	 that	 it	 was locked!	 He	 could	 hear	 the	 beast	 getting	 closer.	 He	 fumbled	 around	 with	 the handle	and	managed	to	somehow	get	it	unlocked.	It	still	wouldn’t	open	though.

In	his	panic	he	didn’t	notice	that	it	was	also	dead-bolted!	He	finally	saw	it	and turned	the	bolt	and	began	swinging	the	door	open	as	quickly	as	he	could.	Just	as he	 was	 about	 to	 jump	 out	 the	 creature	 slammed	 into	 the	 door	 full-force.	 It slammed	shut.	The	coyote	lunged	at	Dillon.	By	pure	instinct	he	shot	out	his	leg

and	 kicked	 the	 thing	 as	 hard	 as	 he	 could	 in	 the	 head.	 The	 creature	 spun backwards	 and	 landed	 hard	 on	 the	 floor.	 Dillon	 knew	 that	 this	 was	 his	 only chance.	 He	 pulled	 the	 door	 open	 again	 and	 ran	 outside.	 When	 he	 got	 out	 he turned	 and	 grabbed	 the	 handle.	 He	 pulled	 on	 the	 door	 as	 hard	 as	 he	 could.

Suddenly	the	coyote’s	head	emerged	from	the	bottom	portion	of	the	door.	Dillon

slammed	its	ugly	head	in	the	jamb.	It	didn’t	even	yelp,	but	continued	to	snap	and growl,	spraying	acidic	saliva	all	over	the	place.	Thankfully	none	of	it	landed	on Dillon.

Dillon	screamed.	He	had	to	resist	the	urge	to	let	go	of	the	door	with	all	his

might.	He	knew	if	he	did	this	fight	would	be	over.	He	looked	around	frantically

for	something	he	could	use	to	push	the	creature	back	inside.	There	was	nothing.

Then	he	had	an	idea.	He	let	one	hand	go	of	the	door	handle	and	quickly	reached

over	and	unclipped	his	backpack.	He	then	slipped	it	off	his	other	arm,	grabbed

the	 strap	 tightly	 and	 began	 levelling	 it	 on	 the	 head	 of	 the	 creature.	 Blow	 after blow	 after	 blow	 came	 raining	 down	 on	 the	 monster.	 Dillon	 didn’t	 know	 if	 the beast	 could	 feel	 any	 pain	 but	 eventually	 it	 retracted	 its	 head	 enough	 so	 that	 he was	 able	 to	 open	 the	 door	 slightly	 and	 slam	 it	 down	 on	 the	 creatures	 snout	 as hard	as	he	could.	It	finally	made	a	yelping	sound	and	pulled	back	into	the	room.

Dillon	slammed	the	door	tightly.

He	 fell	 back,	 exhausted	 from	 the	 encounter.	 He	 tried	 to	 catch	 his	 breath.

Then	 he	 heard	 it:	 distant	 howls	 coming	 somewhere	 in	 the	 desert.	 His	 heart skipped	and	his	face	went	pale	again.	After	taking	a	moment	to	digest	what	was

potentially	 about	 to	 happen	 he	 leaped	 to	 his	 feet,	 clipped	 his	 backpack	 on,	 and ran	to	his	bike.	He	slipped	his	helmet	on	and	was	off	as	quick	as	he	could,	back the	way	he	had	come.	The	howls	were	getting	closer.	He	turned	his	head	to	look

back	as	he	entered	the	trail	and	could	see	something	coming	toward	him	in	the distance.	 Then	 another	 object	 caught	 his	 attention	 out	 of	 the	 corner	 of	 his	 eye.

He	 couldn’t	 make	 out	 what	 was	 coming	 toward	 him	 as	 the	 desert	 trail	 was constantly	moving	up	and	down	along	the	landscape,	but	he	had	a	pretty	good—

terrifying—idea.	He	silently	berated	himself	for	not	taking	the	highway	instead.

At	least	he	would	have	been	able	to	see	these	things	coming,	and	maybe	even	get

help	 from	 a	 passing	 car.	 No.	 Unfortunately	 he	 was	 now	 committed	 to	 the	 trail.

He	couldn’t	turn	back	now.

He	pumped	his	legs	down	on	the	pedals	as	fast	as	he	could.	He	got	so	much

speed	that	he	started	getting	some	decent	air	off	the	peaks	of	each	rise.	Dust	flew out	behind	him.	The	path	wound,	dipped,	and	turned.	He	went	into	a	slight	dip

and	then	came	up	fast	to	the	top	of	a	peak.	His	bike	caught	at	least	five	feet	of air.	 In	 mid	 jump,	 movement	 caught	 his	 eye	 to	 the	 right.	 He	 looked	 over	 to	 see another	one	of	those	beasts	leaping	for	him	from	a	hill.	By	instinct	Dillon	shot his	 foot	 out	 and	 clipped	 the	 creature	 in	 the	 side.	 It	 went	 down	 and	 Dillon	 sped on.	He	knew	somehow	that	he	wasn’t	going	to	be	able	to	outrun	these	things	so

he	 decided	 that	 it	 was	 going	 to	 come	 down	 to	 outmaneuvering	 them.	 It	 was	 at this	 point	 that	 he	 got	 really	 appreciative	 of	 his	 parents	 for	 insisting	 that	 he	 be signed	up	for	BMX	racing.	He	knew	that	of	all	the	bike	races	he	had	been	in	this was	now	his	most	important.	He	was	racing	for	his	life!

The	creature	he	hit	out	of	the	air	didn’t	stay	down	long	as	it	bounced	off	the

ground,	 rolled	 up	 on	 its	 feet,	 and	 continued	 the	 chase.	 Dillon	 drifted	 around	 a dusty	corner	and	another	coyote	leaped	at	him	from	an	adjacent	hill.	He	barely

managed	to	duck	out	of	the	way.	He	could	hear	a	slight	sizzling	sound	and	knew

that	the	creature	had	dripped	some	of	its	acidic	saliva	onto	his	helmet.

He	went	over	the	next	rise	and,	by	sheer	luck,	he	clipped	a	third	coyote	in	the

face	with	his	front	tire.	As	it	hit	the	tire	it	spun	around	a	couple	of	times	before	it crashed	 into	 the	 ground.	 That	 last	 blow	 almost	 threw	 Dillon	 from	 his	 bike.	 It took	all	his	skill	to	land	after	that	hit.	Thankfully	there	didn’t	appear	to	be	any damage	that	he	could	note	as	he	hit	the	ground	and	sped	on.

Dillon	swooped	into	a	low	valley	that	twisted	and	turned.	He	sucked	in	his

breath	as	he	went	around	every	corner,	expecting	to	see	another	creature	lunging

at	him.	The	sound	of	the	howls	of	the	beasts	made	Dillon’s	heart	pump	faster.	It was	a	gross	sound.	Not	like	the	smooth	long	howl	you	would	hear	from	a	wolf,

but	more	of	a	yelping	and	yipping	howl,	almost	akin	to	that	of	a	hyena	or	even

screaming	 children.	 It	 was	 terrifying!	 The	 worst	 part	 was	 that,	 because	 of	 the extremely	uneven	lay	of	the	land,	the	yelps	sometimes	seemed	far	away	while	at

other	times	they	sounded	as	though	they	were	right	on	top	of	him.

Dillon	tried	to	shrug	the	unpleasant	sounds	away	and	just	focus	on	speeding

through	these	badlands	as	fast	as	he	could.	He	hit	a	fairly	long	straight	stretch	in the	low	area	he	was	ripping	through	and	glanced	back.	He	could	see	two	of	the

coyotes	come	over	opposite	rises	and	into	the	valley	in	full	pursuit.	They	didn’t seem	to	be	tiring	and	they	were	coming	on	fast.	The	most	disturbing	thing	was

that	Dillon	had	no	idea	where	the	third	one	was.	He	turned	his	attention	back	in front	 of	 himself	 again	 and	 pumped	 his	 legs	 down	 on	 the	 pedals	 as	 fast	 as	 he could,	but	he	knew	he	couldn’t	keep	it	up	for	much	longer.	The	straight	stretch

finally	 veered	 to	 the	 right	 and	 climbed	 back	 up.	 He	 used	 all	 his	 dexterity	 to barely	 miss	 a	 massive	 boulder	 that	 just	 seemed	 to	 appear	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the trail	 as	 he	 went	 around	 the	 corner.	 He	 knew	 that	 if	 he	 made	 one	 mistake	 and wiped	out	that	the	chase	would	be	over.	He	heard	what	sounded	like	gunshots	in

the	distance	but	didn’t	dare	stop	and	take	a	look.	He	did	manage	to	glance	back

and	noticed	that	the	two	coyotes	who	were	in	pursuit	stopped	for	a	moment	and

seemed	to	be	looking	at	something	in	the	distance.	He	counted	himself	lucky	as

the	 distraction	 was	 enough	 for	 him	 to	 get	 a	 bit	 ahead	 before	 they	 turned	 and started	the	chase	once	more.

As	 he	 got	 to	 the	 top	 of	 the	 rise	 he	 could	 finally	 see	 the	 lush	 green	 oasis lingering	 before	 him.	 It	 was	 still	 a	 ways	 off,	 but	 just	 the	 sight	 of	 it	 gave	 the young	boy	hope	that	he	might	make	it.	The	question	in	Dillon’s	mind,	however,

was	if	he	had	enough	speed	and	endurance	to	make	it	to	the	threshold	before	the

coyotes	got	him?	And,	if	he	did	make	it,	could	he	survive	long	enough	to	make	it to	someone	for	help?

Dillon	also	felt	indignant	to	the	boy	who	had	helped	him	in	the	shop	with	the

bike	as	he	said	this	trail	was	well	traveled,	and	yet	he	hadn’t	seen	a	single	soul!

He	shook	all	those	unpleasant	thoughts	from	his	mind	and	sped	as	fast	as	his	legs

would	drive	down	on	the	pedals.

The	 coyotes	 behind	 him	 were	 relentless!	 And	 they	 were	 gaining	 on	 him

again.

Focus	 Dillon,	 he	 said	 to	 himself. You	 can	 do	 this.	 He	 was	 almost	 there!	 A few	more	rises,	a	short	straight	stretch,	and	he	would	be	there.	He	was	already

formulating	 a	 plan	 to	 be	 able	 to	 lose	 the	 creatures	 in	 the	 forest.	 He	 knew	 that once	 he	 got	 out	 of	 the	 open	 areas	 he	 should	 be	 able	 to	 out	 manoeuvre	 them amongst	the	trees.

By	 this	 time	 the	 two	 that	 were	 right	 behind	 him	 were	 nipping	 at	 his	 heels.

Dillon	came	down	from	the	last	rise	and	onto	the	short	straight	stretch.	He	just crossed	the	line	into	the	oasis	when	he	saw	something	emerge	from	the	corner	of

his	eye.	He	turned	his	head	slightly	to	the	right	and	saw	it.	The	third	coyote!	It was	 in	 mid	 leap	 and	 he	 didn’t	 have	 time	 to	 react.	 It	 slammed	 into	 him	 hard, launching	him	from	his	bike.	The	bike	rolled	and	tumbled	onto	the	grass.	Dillon

hit	 the	 ground	 hard	 and	 rolled	 a	 number	 of	 times	 before	 coming	 to	 a	 stop.	 He shook	the	dizziness	away	and	quickly	turned	around	to	see	the	coyote	a	couple

of	feet	from	him,	baring	its	fangs	and	stalking	forward.

He	looked	for	something	he	could	use	as	a	weapon,	but	there	was	nothing.	It

was	 almost	 to	 him	 when	 it	 suddenly	 stopped.	 It	 stopped	 growling	 and	 looked confused.	It	backed	away,	appearing	to	be	in	pain.	It	started	issuing	whimpers	as smoke	began	coming	from	its	paws.	It	turned	to	flee	but	couldn’t	as	its	legs	burst into	 flames,	 then	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 creature	 went	 up	 in	 a	 fiery	 inferno	 like	 an incredibly	 dry	 tree	 that	 had	 a	 match	 thrown	 on	 it.	 The	 screams	 it	 made	 were horrific!	 Dillon	 scrambled	 away	 from	 the	 dying	 beast	 and	 cupped	 his	 ears	 to block	out	the	sound.	In	a	matter	of	seconds	it	was	over	and	all	that	was	left	of	the beast	was	a	pile	of	smouldering	ash.

Dillon	looked	from	the	pile	of	ash	to	the	other	two	coyotes	that	were	at	the

edge	 of	 the	 Oasis.	 They	 paced	 back	 and	 forth,	 frothing	 acidic	 saliva,	 but	 not daring	 to	 enter	 the	 lush	 grounds.	 After	 a	 moment	 they	 both	 turned	 and	 ran	 off into	the	desert.

Dillon	was	dumbfounded,	not	knowing	what	to	think	about	the	events	he	had

just	been	a	part	of.	He	stood	up	and	walked	over	to	the	pile	of	ash	and	kicked	it

around	with	his	foot.	As	he	did	he	noticed	a	glint	come	from	within	the	pile.	Not wanting	to	touch	the	ash	with	his	hands	he	searched	around	for	a	small	branch

then	used	it	to	unearth	what	he	saw.	It	appeared	to	be	a	small	metal	chip	of	some sort.	He	knew	that	it	was	no	coincidence	that	this	creature	had,	what	appeared	to be,	an	implant	imbedded	in	it.	He	scooped	it	up	and	placed	it	into	the	side	pocket of	his	backpack.	He	then	collected	his	bike	and	started	for	the	resort.	He	knew	he needed	to	tell	someone	about	what	had	just	happened	but	he	didn’t	know	who.

Who	was	going	to	believe	this	crazy	story! he	thought	to	himself. And	 what of	Tom	Tom? He	knew	he	had	to	go	back.	He	knew	he	had	to	go	back	right	away.





13

S T A R T L I N G 	 D I S C O V E R Y

Dillon	raced	to	the	bike	shop	in	order	to	return	the	rental.	The	whole

way	over,	he	kept	reminding	himself	to	be	cool,	but	the	excitement	of

the	situation	wouldn’t	allow	for	that.	He	had	to	dance	around	why	the

bike	was	a	little	more	scratched	than	it	was	when	he	picked	it	up,	but	Tara,	the same	woman	who	rented	it	to	him	didn’t	seem	overly	concerned	about	it.	What

she	did	seem	concerned	about	was	how	much	of	a	hurry	Dillon	seemed	to	be	in.

He	knew	he	would	definitely	have	to	do	better	when	he	asked	Dad	to	take	him	to

the	information	center.

Dillon	brushed	off	his	anxiousness	as	him	having	to	go	to	the	restroom	real

bad.	The	story	seemed	to	work	as	she	didn’t	press	him	on	it	anymore.

“Thanks	for	the	ride,”	he	said	as	he	hoisted	his	backpack	over	his	shoulder

and	headed	for	the	door.

“No	problem,”	the	lady	replied.	“Next	time,	try	and	be	more	careful.	A	bike

can	 be	 replaced,	 but	 we	 wouldn’t	 want	 you	 getting	 hurt.	 That	 could	 ruin	 your vacation.”

Dillon	paused	at	the	door	and	glanced	back	at	the	woman,	the	seriousness	of

his	situation	crashing	down	on	him.	“You’re	right	about	that,”	he	agreed	soberly.

He	was	about	to	leave	when	he	noticed	the	lights	flickered	in	the	store	and

then	went	out.	“Another	black	out?”	Dillon	asked.

Tara	 just	 smiled	 and	 nodded.	 “We’re	 in	 the	 process	 of	 upgrading	 our

electrical	system.	When	that’s	done,	these	should	be	a	thing	of	the	past.”





The	 lights	 flickered	 and	 came	 to	 life	 again	 as	 Dillon	 nodded	 to	 the	 woman and	exited	the	shop.

AFTER	HE	WAS	GONE,	TARA	STARED	AT	HIS	HELMET	AS	SHE	RAN	HER	HANDS	OVER

the	small	acid	burns	that	were	there.	She	put	the	scarred	equipment	down	on	the

counter	and	reached	for	the	phone.

“HELLO,”	 BRUCE	 SAID	 AS	 HE	 ANSWERED	 HIS	 PHONE.	 “HEY	 DILLON!	 HOW	 ARE

you?”	 he	 asked	 as	 he	 continued	 walking	 toward	 the	 pool	 with	 his	 towel	 slung over	his	shoulder.	Gwen	was	close	beside	him.	“Ya	…	we’re	just	heading	to	the

pool.	 It’s	 too	 bad	 you	 didn’t	 come	 to	 town	 with	 us.	 We	 saw	 tons	 of	 cool	 stuff!

Even	Claire	had	a	good	time	if	you	can	believe	that?”

Gwen	looked	up	at	Dad	and	giggled	at	the	comment.

“What	have	you	been	up	to?	I	assumed	you	and	Jordan	were	hanging	by	the

pool.”	He	listened	as	Dillon	responded.	“Oh	…	you	went	for	a	bike	ride.	Nice!	I

hope	you	saw	lots	of	cool	scenery!	And	no,	I	won’t	tell	your	Mom	that	you	split

from	 Jordan.	 You	 know	 what	 she’s	 like	 …	 a	 little	 overprotective.”	 He	 looked down	at	Gwen	and	smiled.	“Okay	man.	If	you	want	to	join	us	we’ll	be	pool	side

by	the	outdoor	patio.	Mom	is	grabbing	us	some	shade	under	one	of	the	umbrellas

there.”	 He	 paused	 again	 as	 Dillon	 responded.	 “See	 you	 in	 a	 bit	 then,”	 he finished,	sliding	his	phone	back	into	his	pocket.

“It	 sounds	 like	 your	 brother	 had	 a	 good	 time	 on	 a	 bike	 ride,”	 he	 said	 to Gwen.	“Maybe	we	should	all	consider	doing	that?	A	big	family	bike	ride.”

Gwen	smiled	and	nodded.

DILLON	RACED	TO	HIS	ROOM	AS	QUICKLY	AS	HE	COULD.	HE	WANTED	TO	DROP	OFF

his	 backpack	 and	 do	 a	 quick	 check	 of	 his	 appearance	 before	 going	 to	 see	 Dad.

He	 didn’t	 want	 to	 raise	 any	 suspicions	 that	 his	 activities	 while	 away	 from	 the family	were	anything	but	normal.	It	also	gave	him	a	chance	to	wind	down	after

the	encounter.	He	knew	he	had	to	play	this	smart	and	cool.	He	had	to	get	back	to the	 information	 center	 and	 he	 knew	 that	 if	 he	 told	 Dad	 the	 truth	 about	 what happened	he	would	never	believe	him.	If,	on	the	other	hand,	he	could	show	him

the	signs	of	struggle	in	the	center,	and	the	absence	of	Tom	Tom,	then	that	would elevate	his	chances	of	getting	help	to	another	level.

After	 changing	 his	 shirt	 and	 wiping	 the	 dust	 from	 his	 face	 and	 arms	 he headed	for	the	pool.	He	knew	he	had	to	play	this	cool	and	smart.	He	could	have

asked	Dad	over	the	phone	to	take	him	to	the	center,	but	he	knew	that	Dad	always

responded	 better	 to	 such	 requests	 in	 person.	 That	 brought	 a	 challenge,	 as	 he wasn’t	sure	he	was	going	to	be	able	to	act	normally	enough	to	convince	him	that

nothing	was	wrong.	It	was	a	gamble,	but	he	had	to	try.

As	he	entered	the	pool	area	he	did	a	quick	scan	and	saw	his	family	hanging

out	under	an	umbrella	by	the	patio	just	as	Dad	said.	Of	course	Jordan	was	off	to the	 side	 talking	 to	 some	 girls	 he	 had	 probably	 just	 met.	 Claire	 was	 in	 the	 open sun	apparently	trying	to	bake	herself	into	a	nice	golden	toasty	color,	and	Gwen

was	 floating	 in	 the	 pool	 nearby	 on	 a	 massive	 inflatable	 swan.	 Mom	 and	 Dad were	under	the	umbrella	having	a	cool	drink	and	talking.

As	 he	 started	 to	 walk	 over	 he	 noticed	 a	 guy	 at	 the	 other	 end	 of	 the	 pool lounging	back	in	a	deck	chair	and	staring	in	his	direction.	The	guy	had	massive

wild	blonde	hair	that	danced	wildly	in	the	slightest	breeze,	and	he	was	wearing	a colorful	 Hawaiian	 t-shirt.	 Dillon	 almost	 laughed	 because	 he	 looked	 so	 strange, but	then	he	suddenly	got	an	uncomfortable	feeling	from	him	for	some	reason.	It

was	 weird.	 He	 knew	 he	 could	 get	 sidetracked	 with	 uncomfortable	 feelings	 and just	shook	it	off	as	nerves.	He	cleared	his	mind	and	tried	to	focus	on	the	current situation:	getting	Dad	to	the	center.

Dillon	took	a	couple	of	deep	breaths	in	order	to	calm	his	nerves	and	began

walking	over	to	them.	As	he	approached,	Mom	and	Dad	both	looked	up,	smiling.

“How’s	it	going	little	man?”	Mom	asked.

“Not	 bad,”	 Dillon	 responded,	 trying	 to	 be	 as	 cool	 as	 possible.	 “How	 was

town?”

“It	 was	 fun!”	 Mom	 said	 enthusiastically.	 “We	 saw	 the	 residential	 areas.

Found	out	that	they	have	a	tropical	zoo,	there’s	a	small	amusement	park	on	the

other	side	of	the	Oasis,	and	tons	of	little	touristy	shops	with	locals	selling	their wares.	You	should	have	come!	You	would	have	loved	it!”

“Sounds	great.”	Dillon	tried	as	hard	as	he	could	to	sound	excited.	He	wasn’t

sure	his	performance	was	cutting	it.

“What’s	up	man?”	Dad	asked.	“You	seem	like	something	is	bothering	you?”

That’s	 it!	 Dillon	 figured	 he	 was	 done	 at	 that	 point. Come	 on	 man!	 Get	 it together! he	thought	to	himself.	“Nothing’s	wrong,”	he	responded	quickly.	Then he	had	an	idea.	“I	saw	some	cool	plants	around	here	that	I	didn’t	recognize	and	I really	want	to	go	pick	up	a	book	on	the	local	plant	life.	I	think	I	saw	one	at	the information	center.”

“I	guess	I	should	be	happy	that	 one	of	our	sons	is	interested	in	expanding	his mind,”	Dad	replied	sarcastically	as	he	smirked	at	Jordan	who	just	walked	back

from	talking	to	his	new	friends.	“But	since	when	have	you	been	into	plants?”

“Oh,	you	know	me.	I	love	reading	everything	about	different	places,”	Dillon

replied	with	a	shrug.	“So	…	I	guess	I	came	to	ask	you	if	we	could	take	a	quick

drive	to	the	information	center	so	I	could	grab	that	book?”

Dad	visibly	sighed	a	bit.	“We	just	got	to	the	pool	Dillon.	Does	it	have	to	be

right	now?”

“It’s	not	that	far	up	the	road,”	Dillon	put	in	urgently.	He	realized	it	sounded

too	insistent	so	he	said	more	calmly,	“It	won’t	take	long.	I	don’t	know	what	time the	center	closes,	and	it	would	be	a	great	book	to	read	while	I	enjoy	the	sun	with you	guys	pool	side.

Mom	gave	Dad	that	look,	and	Dillon	knew	he	had	him!

“Okay,”	replied	Dad	resignedly.	“Let	me	grab	my	keys	from	the	room.”

“Thanks	Dad!	Dillon	exclaimed.

Dad	nodded,	removed	himself	from	the	chair	and	headed	for	his	room.

Mom	smiled.	“You	boys	have	fun.”

Dillon	nodded	and	smiled,	but	on	the	inside	he	was	terrified.	What	if	he	was

putting	 his	 Dad	 in	 danger	 by	 taking	 him	 there?	 He	 put	 the	 disturbing	 thought



away.	He	didn’t	know	what	else	to	do	and	besides,	he	had	escaped	the	coyotes

once	before	by	himself,	it	should	be	a	breeze	with	his	Dad	with	him.

THEY	 PULLED	 UP	 TO	 THE	 CENTER	 AND	 EVERYTHING	 APPEARED	 NORMAL	 AT	 FIRST

glance.	There	were	even	a	few	more	cars	in	the	parking	lot.	Dillon	was	surprised by	this	given	the	fact	that	only	just	over	an	hour	had	elapsed	since	he	made	his escape	from	the	place.	He	didn’t	let	the	apparent	normalcy	of	the	situation	deter him	from	being	on	guard	though.	He	and	Dad	approached	the	front	door	together

but	Dillon	reached	for	the	handle	first,	not	willing	to	let	his	unsuspecting	father go	 in	 first	 without	 any	 idea	 of	 the	 situation	 they	 faced.	 Dillon	 figured	 that	 he could	better	respond	to	anything	that	came	leaping	out	of	there.

He	opened	the	door	quickly	and	launched	himself	into	the	center.

“Whoa	there!”	Dad	exclaimed.	“You	really	must	want	that	book,”	he	joked.

Dillon	didn’t	smile.

He	 looked	 around	 and	 noticed	 that	 the	 place	 didn’t	 seem	 touched	 at	 all!

There	 were	 no	 signs	 of	 struggle	 and	 there	 were	 even	 a	 few	 people	 mingling around,	looking	at	merchandise.	As	he	moved	through	the	store	he	noted	that	the

one	 thing	 that	 was	 absent	 was	 Charlie,	 the	 stuffed	 coyote	 that	 had	 frightened Gwen	 when	 they	 first	 arrived.	 He	 didn’t	 know	 what	 to	 think. Was	 Charlie	 the coyote	 that	 attacked	 me?	 Was	 he	 somehow	 in	 stasis	 before? None	 of	 it	 made sense.

“So	how	long	did	you	have	to	wait	in	that	traffic	delay	this	morning	on	the

highway,”	 he	 overheard	 someone	 say	 as	 he	 moved	 over	 to	 where	 he	 had	 the battle	with	the	first	coyote.	He	paused	for	a	moment	to	consider	that.

Maybe	 that’s	 why	 no	 one	 was	 around	 when	 Tom	 Tom	 was	 questioned? he thought	 to	 himself. But	 who	 would	 do	 that? He	 shook	 his	 head	 in	 confusion.

Again,	he	had	more	questions	than	answers.	First	the	missing	stuffed	coyote	and

now	this.

When	 he	 got	 to	 the	 place	 where	 the	 coyote	 was	 he	 noticed	 that	 all	 of	 the racks	of	clothing	were	neatly	placed	and	there	seemed	to	be	no	sign	of	anything.

He	climbed	under	one	of	the	racks	to	look	around.

“Dillon,	what	are	you	doing?”	Dad	asked	as	he	approached.

“Oh	 …	 nothing	 Dad,”	 Dillon	 responded	 from	 under	 the	 rack.	 “I	 just

remembered	 that	 I	 think	 I	 might	 have	 dropped	 something	 around	 here	 the	 last time	we	were	through.”	He	stuck	his	head	out	from	behind	some	T-shirts,	“It	just sort	of	hit	me	when	we	walked	in.”

Dad	looked	at	him	quizzically.

His	head	disappeared	behind	the	shirts	again.

“Can	I	help	you	with	something?”

Dad	turned	his	head	and	saw	a	young	woman	approaching.	She	was	thin,	had

dark	 brown	 hair,	 olive	 skin,	 and	 a	 nice	 smile.	 “I	 don’t	 think	 so,”	 Dad	 replied.

“My	son	here	thinks	he	might	have	lost	something	the	last	time	we	were	here.”

Dillon	could	hear	the	conversation	and	knew	that	he	had	to	exit	the	clothing

rack	 so	 he	 wouldn’t	 draw	 anymore	 suspicion.	 Before	 he	 did	 he	 noticed

something	on	the	floor	underneath	the	rack.	He	quickly	pulled	out	his	phone	and

turned	on	the	flashlight	in	order	to	get	a	better	look.	He	rubbed	his	hand	on	the surface	of	the	floor	and	noticed	that	it	had	marks	that	appeared	to	be	burned	into the	floor.	“The	acid	drool!”	He	whispered	to	himself.	He	knew	then	that	this	was an	elaborate	coverup.	He	snapped	a	quick	picture.

“No,”	he	said	finally	as	he	pulled	himself	from	the	floor.	“It’s	not	here.”

“What’s	not	there?”	Dad	asked.

“Oh	nothing	…	nothing	important	anyway.”

“Well	if	there’s	anything	you	need	just	ask,”	said	the	young	woman.

“Actually	 …”	 Dillon	 began,	 “I	 was	 just	 wondering	 where	 Tom	 Tom	 is

today?”

The	 woman	 looked	 at	 Dillon	 for	 a	 moment.	 He	 tried	 to	 detect	 if	 there	 was any	obvious	hesitation	or	clue	in	her	look	that	gave	him	any	indication	that	she knew	 the	 truth	 about	 Tom	 Tom.	 Her	 look	 told	 him	 nothing.	 “He’s	 not	 here today,”	she	responded.

“Where	is	he?”	Dillon	pressed.

“I	believe	he	called	in	sick.	At	least	that’s	what	I	gathered	from	my	boss.”

“And	who	might	that	be?”	Dillon	asked.

“Dillon!”	Dad	reprimanded.	“I	don’t	think	that’s	any	of	your	business.	Now let’s	get	the	book	you	were	looking	for	and	get	out	of	here.”	Dad	turned	to	the

woman,	 “I’m	 sorry,”	 he	 said.	 “My	 son	 is	 sometimes	 too	 curious	 for	 his	 own good.”	He	looked	disapprovingly	at	Dillon.

“It’s	okay,”	the	young	woman	replied	and	smiled	at	the	both	of	them	before

heading	back	to	the	counter.

Dillon	 sheepishly	 offered	 Dad	 a	 disarming	 smile	 then	 scurried	 off	 to	 the book	section	before	Dad	could	say	another	word	to	him.

This	is	weird. He	thought	to	himself. How	could	they	get	this	place	in	order and	opened	again	so	quickly? 	 They	even	have	a	replacement	for	Tom	Tom!	These guys	(whoever	they	are)	are	good.

Dillon	 was	 now	 convinced	 more	 than	 ever	 that	 he	 had	 to	 figure	 out	 this conspiracy.	He	knew	he	had	to	find	out	what	had	happened	to	Tom	Tom,	and	he

knew	he	had	to	find	out	what	those	creatures	were	that	he	escaped	from.	Maybe

there	was	a	clue	to	that	in	the	book	on	desert	animals	that	Tom	Tom	suggested	he buy?

He	went	over	to	the	book	section	and	lingered	around	for	a	minute,	all-the-

while	 looking	 around	 trying	 to	 gauge	 a	 good	 opportunity	 to	 sneak	 away	 for	 a minute.	He	knew	he	had	to	get	to	that	back	room.

He	peeked	his	head	up	over	the	shelf	and	noticed	that	Dad	was	at	the	far	end

of	 the	 center	 looking	 at	 a	 rack	 of	 brochures.	 He	 glanced	 to	 the	 left	 and	 right quickly	 and	 then	 ducked	 back	 down	 and	 snuck	 around	 the	 shelf.	 He	 weaved through	 the	 rows	 keeping	 his	 head	 lower	 than	 the	 racks,	 hoping	 that	 no	 one would	be	able	to	detect	him.

He	got	to	the	back	wall	and	creeped	along	it,	stopping	twice	to	quickly	dodge

behind	 some	 shelves	 in	 order	 to	 avoid	 another	 customer.	 He	 approached	 the corner	 that	 intersected	 with	 the	 hallway	 which	 led	 to	 the	 back	 room.	 He	 was about	to	slip	around	it	when	he	felt	someone	tap	his	shoulder.	He	leaped	around

and	made	a	short	cry	as	the	tap	startled	him!	There,	looking	him	in	the	face,	was a	small	boy	about	five	years	of	age.	He	stared	at	Dillon	with	his	bright	blue	eyes.

“Whatcha	doing?”	he	asked	innocently.

“What	am	I	doing?”	Dillon	whispered	back	in	an	exasperated	tone.	“Trying

not	to	die	of	fright	because	of	you!”

The	 boy	 was	 about	 to	 say	 something	 else	 but	 Dillon	 put	 up	 his	 finger.

“Shhhh,”	 he	 said	 quietly.	 “If	 you	 must	 know	 I’m	 a	 private	 investigator	 on	 a mission	to	crack	a	mystery.”

The	boy	looked	at	him	blankly.

“Like	agent	Cody	Banks	…	Spy	Kids	…”	Dillon	tried	to	explain.

The	boy	looked	blankly.

“Right	 …	 that’s	 before	 your	 time,”	 he	 replied.	 “Anyway	 …	 I	 need	 to	 get down	this	hallway	without	being	seen,	and	I	can’t	have	anyone	know	about	my

mission.”

The	boy	nodded.

“So	…	you	can’t	tell	anyone	that	you	met	me.	Understand?”

The	boy	nodded	again.

“No	one,”	Dillon	reinforced.	“Or	I’m	a	dead	man,”	he	said	while	pulling	his

finger	across	his	throat	dramatically	in	order	to	emphasize	his	point.

The	boy’s	eyes	went	wide!

“You	don’t	want	me	to	die?	Do	you?”

The	boy	shook	his	head	vigorously	back	and	forth.

“Great!	 Now	 go	 and	 play	 and	 don’t	 mention	 a	 word	 of	 this	 to	 anyone,”

Dillon	said	as	he	turned	his	head	back	around	the	corner	in	order	to	take	another peek.	He	quickly	looked	back	and	saw	the	boy	standing	there.	He	motioned	with

his	 hand	 for	 him	 to	 leave.	 The	 boy,	 still	 seemingly	 in	 shock	 about	 Dillon’s statement	 of	 possible	 death,	 turned	 and	 ran	 back	 toward	 the	 front	 of	 the	 store.

“Kids!”	Dillon	whispered	to	himself	in	exasperation	as	he	shook	head.

He	 did	 one	 more	 quick	 check	 to	 see	 if	 the	 coast	 was	 clear	 and	 then	 darted down	the	hallway.	He	made	it	to	the	end,	grasped	the	door	handle,	opened	it	up,

and	 slipped	 inside.	 The	 sight	 he	 saw	 shocked	 him!	 This	 room	 was	 in	 total disarray	 the	 last	 time	 he	 was	 here,	 merely	 an	 hour	 earlier	 and	 yet	 it	 was completely	put	back	 together.	He	walked	 around	a	little,	 wearily	looking	about and	 readying	 for	 an	 attack	 from	 a	 coyote,	 but	 none	 came.	 He	 quickly	 glanced around	a	few	boxes.	Nothing.	He	noted	that	the	table	was	in	exactly	the	location it	 was	 when	 he	 had	 his	 talk	 with	 Tom	 Tom	 and	 that	 there	 were	 no	 signs	 of	 a

struggle.	He	ran	to	the	back	door	and	noted	that	it	was	locked	once	again.

This	is	weird! He	thought	again	to	himself.

Before	 turning	 to	 leave	 he	 did	 notice	 more	 of	 the	 burn	 marks	 on	 the	 floor where	the	beast	had	drooled	while	it	attacked	him. I’m	not	crazy! 	He	reaffirmed to	himself	pulling	his	phone	out	and	taking	a	picture	of	the	marred	floor.

As	he	opened	the	door	to	leave	he	ran	right	into	someone	who	was	coming

into	the	room.	It	was	Troy!	‘The	Gate	Keeper.’

“Hey	 man,”	 Troy	 said,	 trying	 to	 collect	 himself	 from	 the	 shock	 of	 seeing Dillon	there.	“What	are	you	doing	back	here?”	he	asked	in	amazement,	clearly

not	expecting	to	see	him.

Dillon	 was	 stunned	 for	 a	 moment,	 “I	 …	 ah	 …	 was	 just	 looking	 for	 the restroom.	I	obviously	took	the	wrong	way.”

Troy	smiled.	“No	problem,”	he	said.	“It’s	just	down	the	hallway	to	your	left.”

Dillon	smiled	weakly.	“What	are	you	doing	here?”	He	dared	to	asked.

“Me?	Oh	lots	of	us	at	the	resort	have	to	do	double,	triple,	quadruple	duties

around	 the	 place.	 I	 was	 asked	 to	 come	 and	 count	 inventory	 today,”	 he	 replied with	his	bright,	infectious,	smile.

Dillon	nodded	and	slipped	by	the	man.

“Bye	Dillon!”	he	heard	Troy	call	after	him.	He	turned	slightly	and	offered	a

small	wave,	trying	not	to	appear	too	guilty	of	having	snooped	around.	He	knew

in	his	head	that	he	wasn’t	very	convincing.

As	soon	as	Dillon	exited	the	hallway	he	grabbed	his	Dad	and	told	him	it	was

time	to	go.

“Did	you	get	your	book?”	Dad	asked.

“No	…	it	…	ah	…	wasn’t	in.	They	must	have	sold	all	the	copies.”

Dad	shrugged	and	headed	for	the	door	with	his	son.

Dillon	silently	berated	himself	for	not	actually	going	to	the	restroom	after	he

was	caught	by	Troy.	He	felt	that	he	really	wasn’t	good	at	this	whole	“thinking	on his	feet”	sort	of	thing.	He	knew	he	would	need	to	get	better	at	it	if	he	wanted	to crack	the	case	 without	drawing	suspicion	 to	himself.	Sarah’s	 words	of	 warning rang	out	again	in	his	mind:	“You	have	to	promise	me	that	you	won’t	do	anything

stupid	 like	 going	 to	 look	 for	 this	 entrance.” He	 just	 pushed	 her	 words	 aside.



There’s	too	much	going	on	here,	he	said	to	himself.

Before	 leaving	 the	 center	 he	 glanced	 back	 and	 surveyed	 the	 room	 that	 he barely	escaped	merely	an	hour	ago.	It	was	too	surreal!	He	knew	he	needed	to	get

help,	but	he	also	knew	that	no	one	would	believe	him.	The	only	one	who	would

believe	him	is	Sarah,	but	he	really	didn’t	want	to	have	a	verbal	reprimand	from

her	 right	 now.	 No	 one	 else	 around	 here	 would	 be	 remotely	 accepting	 of	 his circumstance	 except	 maybe	 one	 person.	 It	 was	 a	 long	 shot.	 A	 really	 long	 shot.

But	he	knew	he	had	to	try.

JORDAN	 WAS	 ENJOYING	 THIS	 PLACE!	 IT	 HAD	 EVERYTHING	 HE	 NEEDED:	 LOTS	 OF

sun,	 a	 great	 pool,	 cute	 girls	 his	 age,	 and	 all	 you	 could	 eat.	 He	 wasn’t	 even concerned	about	not	being	able	to	game	while	at	the	resort	which	was	incredibly

shocking,	even	for	him!	He	lounged	back	in	his	chair	that	was	poolside,	soaking

up	the	rays,	and	sucking	back	on	his	virgin	margarita.	This	was	the	life!

“Hey	man,”	he	heard	as	Dillon	approached	with	Dad.	“Enjoying	yourself?”

Dillon	asked.

“Oh	ya,”	came	Jordan’s	response.	“You	should	try	it	on	the	other	side	of	the

pool.	Away	from	me.	There’s	nothing	like	it.”

Dillon	 shrugged	 off	 the	 sleight	 and	 sat	 down	 beside	 him	 looking	 around, trying	not	to	appear	too	anxious.	He	noted	that	Mom	and	Gwen	were	out	in	the

pool	and	that	Dad	was	getting	ready	to	join	them.	Not	too	far	from	Jordan	was

Claire	 who	 was	 reclining	 on	 her	 chair	 and	 appeared	 to	 be	 in	 a	 coma.	 She	 had always	been	a	deep	sleeper	which	Dillon	knew	would	work	to	his	advantage.

“What’s	 up	 man?”	 asked	 Jordan,	 his	 eyes	 still	 closed	 and	 a	 slight	 smile	 on his	face.	He	appeared	to	be	in	total	relax	mode.

“Oh	 nothing,”	 Dillon	 replied,	 pausing	 until	 Dad	 was	 no	 longer	 in	 earshot.

“Okay	man,”	Dillon	suddenly	said	as	he	leaned	closer	to	his	brother.	“Something

really	creepy	is	going	on	here!”	He	whispered	as	loud	as	he	dared.

The	suddenness	of	Dillon’s	response	startled	Jordan.	He	looked	over	at	him

skeptically.	“What	are	you	talking	about	goof?”	he	responded.



Dillon	 leaned	 in	 further	 and	 explained	 the	 whole	 thing,	 constantly	 looking around	 to	 see	 if	 anyone	 was	 watching.	 Jordan	 seemed	 to	 listen.	 At	 times, however,	he	would	snort	or	scoff	a	little,	especially	when	Dillon	tried	to	explain the	coyote	incident.	Dillon	continued	anyway.	When	he	was	done	Jordan	stared

at	him	for	a	moment,	then	a	huge	smile	spread	across	his	face.

“Nice	try	Dillon,”	he	said	with	a	chuckle.	“Interesting	story.	Too	bad	it’s	all

in	your	head.	I’ve	always	said	that	you	have	a	pretty	awesome	imagination.	This

one	is	one	of	your	better	ones.”	He	put	his	head	back	down	and	closed	his	eyes

again.

“I’m	 not	 imagining	 things!”	 Dillon	 replied,	 his	 voice	 rising	 a	 little	 louder than	 he	 wanted.	 Claire	 stirred	 a	 bit	 in	 her	 chair.	 “There’s	 something	 going	 on here	and	we	need	to	figure	out	what	it	is.”

“Uh	huh,”	was	the	only	response	he	received	from	his	brother.

“I	 have	 proof!”	 Dillon	 exclaimed,	 pulling	 out	 his	 phone.	 “Look	 at	 these pictures.”

That	caught	Jordan’s	attention.

“These	 are	 spots	 on	 the	 floor	 at	 the	 information	 center	 where	 the	 thing drooled	 acidic	 saliva.	 And	 this	 …	 ”	 he	 looked	 around	 cautiously	 as	 he	 showed Jordan	the	small	burn	that	was	on	his	hand.

Jordan	pulled	his	sunglasses	off	in	order	to	get	a	better	look.	Then	he	laughed

and	 sat	 back	 on	 the	 chair,	 dismissing	 the	 “evidence”	 with	 a	 wave.	 “Good	 one Dil.	You	almost	had	me.”

Dillon’s	 face	 went	 red.	 “Ahhhh	 …	 Why	 did	 I	 even	 try	 to	 talk	 to	 you	 about this?”	he	said	in	exasperation	as	he	got	up	from	his	chair.

“Have	fun	on	your	little	adventure,”	he	heard	Jordan	say	as	he	stormed	away.

DILLON	LAID	IN	BED	FLIPPING	THROUGH	THE	BOOK	ON	JOHN	TAYLOR	SEBASTIAN.

He	could	hear	Jordan’s	snores	lightly	in	the	background.	As	he	flipped	through

he	was	drawn	to	the	pictures	and	spent	a	long	time	looking	at	them.	He	would

have	 loved	 to	 have	 gotten	 to	 meet	 John	 and	 his	 crew.	 He	 flipped	 the	 page	 and

noted	 the	 picture	 that	 had	 John	 alone	 leaning	 down	 unearthing	 a	 find	 he	 had discovered	on	one	of	his	previous	digs.	The	man	looked	so	focussed	on	what	he

was	 doing.	 As	 Dillon	 looked	 closer	 something	 caught	 his	 eye.	 There	 was something	 hanging	 from	 his	 belt	 but	 he	 couldn’t	 quite	 make	 it	 out.	 He	 quickly grabbed	his	phone,	switched	on	the	camera,	pointed	it	at	the	picture	and	zoomed

in.	Even	though	the	picture	was	terribly	pixilated	he	just	knew	what	it	was	and

almost	 fell	 over!	 He	 quickly	 grabbed	 his	 backpack	 and	 rummaged	 through	 it until	he	found	…	the	watch!	He	flipped	the	watch	over	and	stared	in	disbelief	at the	writing	that	was	on	the	back:	JTS!	John	Taylor	Sebastian!	This	actually	was

his	watch!

“How	could	this	be?”	Dillon	whispered	to	himself.

Then	it	struck	him!	Someone	wanted	him	to	come	here.	Someone	somehow

planted	this	watch	for	him	to	find.	The	hairs	on	the	back	of	his	neck	stood	up.

Dillon’s	 heart	 pounded	 furiously	 in	 his	 chest	 with	 the	 revelation	 that someone,	for	whatever	reason,	lured	Dillon	and	his	family	here.

But	who?	And	why?





14

D I L L O N 	 A N D 	 D E R E K

Dillon	looked	around	nervously.	Everything	was	dark	except	for	the

light	 glow	 of	 something	 that	 was	 emanating	 off	 the	 wall.	 It	 was

enough	 to	 be	 able	 to	 make	 out	 shapes	 but	 it	 didn’t	 produce	 enough

light	 to	 manage	 the	 tunnels	 safely.	 He	 reached	 in	 his	 pocket	 and	 pulled	 out	 his phone.	 The	 screen	 seemed	 dim.	 He	 noticed	 that	 there	 were	 no	 bars	 of	 service.

Quickly	 he	 scrolled	 the	 screen	 upwards	 and	 pushed	 on	 the	 flashlight	 function.

The	light	came	on	for	a	moment,	then	began	to	dim.	He	noticed	that	the	battery

indicator	 on	 the	 home	 screen	 was	 slowly	 being	 depleting.	 He	 knew	 he	 had charged	 the	 phone	 before	 leaving	 his	 room	 which	 made	 him	 realize	 now	 that something	must	be	causing	a	disturbance	with	his	electronics.	But	what?

He	tried	to	control	his	breathing	as	the	seconds	ticked	by	as	he	thought	about

his	predicament.	His	eyes	went	to	the	tunnel	wall	as	he	shined	the	dimming	light of	 his	 phone	 upon	 its	 surface.	 There	 on	 the	 wall	 he	 could	 clearly	 make	 out	 the symbol	of	the	eye	in	the	pentagram	surrounded	by	the	square.	His	heart	began	to

pound	and	he	felt	as	though	it	would	leap	out	of	his	chest	at	any	moment.	Dillon closed	his	eyes	as	he	tried	to	get	a	hold	of	his	wild	imagination.	He	could	feel	the cold	 sweat	 of	 his	 palms	 and	 the	 only	 thing	 he	 could	 hear	 was	 the	 sound	 of	 his own	breathing.

He	opened	his	eyes	and	stared	at	the	symbol	as	the	light	waned.	The	symbol

faded	from	his	sight	as	his	phone	went	dead	leaving	him	in	the	dark.



DILLON	WOKE	WITH	A	CHILL.	HE	 LOOKED	 AROUND	 GROGGILY	 AND	 NOTICED	 THAT

he	 was	 in	 his	 hotel	 room.	 The	 sheets	 of	 his	 bed	 were	 scattered	 everywhere	 as though	 he	 had	 a	 fight	 with	 some	 unseen	 monster.	 He	 looked	 over	 to	 see	 his brother	snoozing	soundly	without	a	care	in	the	world.

“I	wish,”	he	whispered	to	himself	as	he	pulled	his	tired	body	from	bed	and

headed	to	the	restroom.	Every	time	he	had	one	of	these	weird	dreams	he	felt	as

though	 he	 was	 hit	 by	 a	 truck	 when	 he	 woke	 up.	 It	 wasn’t	 the	 most	 restful	 of sleeps.

After	 splashing	 some	 water	 on	 his	 face	 he	 jumped	 into	 the	 shower.	 He couldn’t	get	the	dream	out	of	his	head.

What	could	it	mean? 	he	asked	himself. Obviously	there	is	some	reality	to	it, he	reasoned	as	he	knew	that	he	first	saw	the	symbol	in	a	dream	before	he	even

saw	it	in	the	real	world.

How	 is	 that	 even	 possible? 	 he	 questioned	 himself	 as	 he	 scrubbed	 his	 hair thoroughly.

Do	 these	 dreams	 mean	 that	 the	 things	 I	 see	 in	 them	 are	 going	 to	 happen?

That	thought	sent	a	chill	up	his	spine	as	he	remembered	the	dream	where	he	and

Gwen	jumped	off	that	cliff	in	order	to	flee	from	those	spider-like	creatures.	He shook	 his	 head	 in	 disbelief. No,	 he	 reasoned. They	 can’t	 be	 that	 detailed.	 Can they?

After	 he	 finished	 getting	 ready	 he	 called	 his	 Mom	 on	 her	 phone	 and	 asked where	and	when	they	were	having	breakfast.	While	he	spoke	to	her	he	couldn’t

get	 the	 dreams	 out	 of	 his	 head.	 He	 seriously	 considered	 telling	 her	 what	 was happening	 to	 him,	 but	 he	 didn’t	 even	 know	 where	 to	 start	 with	 a	 conversation like	that.	“By	the	way	Mom,	I’m	having	these	dreams	that	I	think	might	actually come	true!	Ya	that	would	sound	normal,” he	thought	to	himself.

He	 shook	 off	 those	 thoughts.	 “I	 don’t	 think	 Jordan	 is	 going	 to	 make	 it,”	 he said	into	the	phone	as	he	glanced	over	at	his	nearly-in-a-coma	brother.	“I’ll	see you	guys	in	a	minute	then,”	he	finished	as	he	hung	up.

“Well	 bro	 …	 see	 ya	 whenever	 you	 wake	 up.”	 Jordan	 grumbled	 something



and	rolled	over.	Dillon	seriously	considered	waking	him	up	as	he	wasn’t	keen	on

being	by	himself	right	now,	even	just	walking	to	breakfast.	He	knew	something

was	happening	here;	something	he	was	now	a	part	of,	whether	he	liked	to	be	or

not.	And	it	was	really	creeping	him	out.

HE	 AND	 THE	 REST	 OF	 HIS	 FAMILY	 HAD	 A	 GREAT	 BREAKFAST.	 IT	 ALMOST	 MADE

Dillon	forget	about	all	the	troubling	events	that	had	happened	to	him	since	he	got to	the	resort	except	for	the	fact	that	he	couldn’t	get	it	all	out	of	his	head.

It	 must	 have	 been	 noticeable	 on	 his	 face	 as	 Mom	 looked	 over	 and	 asked,

“Are	you	okay	honey?	You	look	tired.”

“What	…	oh	…	I’m	okay,”	he	stammered.	“I	just	didn’t	get	much	sleep	last

night.”

In	 truth	 he	 didn’t	 feel	 okay	 with	 the	 events	 he	 was	 caught	 up	 in.	 He	 didn’t know	which	way	to	go.	He	knew	he	couldn’t	confide	in	anyone	as	no	one	would

believe	 him.	 He	 also	 knew	 that	 there	 seemed	 to	 be	 powerful	 forces	 behind	 the disappearances	 of	 John	 Taylor	 Sebastian	 and	 now	 Tom	 Tom	 which	 was

evidenced	by	the	speed	at	which	the	information	center	was	cleaned	up	after	his

encounter	with	the	coyotes.	And	who	was	that	mysterious	man	who	was	talking

with	 Tom	 Tom?	 Dillon	 knew	 he	 probably	 hadn’t	 heard	 the	 last	 of	 him.	 The question	he	had,	however,	was	what	role	he	played	in	the	disappearance	of	Tom

Tom	 if	 any?	 It	 seemed	 weird	 that	 the	 mystery	 man	 would	 just	 leave	 and	 then come	back	to	take	the	old	man	away	when	he	had	a	perfectly	good	opportunity

to	 do	 just	 that	 when	 it	 was	 just	 the	 two	 of	 them	 at	 the	 center.	 That	 man	 also didn’t	 have	 time	 to	 come	 back	 and	 abduct	 Tom	 Tom	 as	 Dillon	 was	 still	 there fighting	 the	 coyote	 when	 he	 disappeared.	 And	 the	 way	 he	 spoke	 about	 John seemed	 to	 suggest	 that	 he	 wanted	 to	 find	 him	 which	 indicated	 that	 there	 were probably	two	groups	of	people	at	play	here.

If	that	was	the	case	then	who	was	the	other	group?	And	were	they	the	ones

who	sent	the	coyotes?	Where	did	they	even	get	coyotes	like	that	anyway?	And

were	the	coyotes	meant	for	Tom	Tom	or	for	him?	That	last	thought	troubled	him

the	most.	The	events	seemed	to	suggest	just	that.	The	coyote	in	the	center	might have	 been	 meant	 for	 Tom	 Tom	 but	 not	 the	 ones	 in	 the	 desert.	 Those	 were definitely	gunning	for	him!	There’s	no	other	reasonable	explanation	for	it.

Finally	Dillon	decided	that	he	would	take	it	easy	for	a	bit	with	his	family,	but not	let	his	guard	down.	He	determined	to	stay	with	at	least	one	member	from	his

family,	 if	 possible,	 and	 keep	 in	 plain	 view	 of	 others	 just	 in	 case	 the	 unknown assailants	 sent	 something	 else	 his	 way.	 He	 felt	 that	 this	 would	 be	 the	 safest course.	Maybe	some	other	piece	of	evidence	would	surface	in	the	meantime?

As	they	were	just	finishing	up	their	delicious	breakfast	of	eggs,	bacon,	toast,

fresh	fruit,	and	the	like	Jordan	stumbled	their	way.	He	looked	rough!

“Tough	night	son?”	Dad	asked	as	he	approached.

Jordan	grumbled.

Gwen	laughed.

“Well	…	when	you’re	done	I	think	we’re	all	just	going	to	lounge	at	the	pool

for	 a	 bit	 and	 then	 maybe	 head	 into	 town	 and	 check	 out	 that	 amusement	 park,”

Mom	stated.	“You	wanna	come?”

Jordan	nodded.

“Man	 of	 few	 words,”	 Dad	 said	 as	 he	 laughed	 and	 went	 in	 for	 some	 more bacon.

After	breakfast	Dillon	headed	back	to	his	room	in	order	to	get	his	swim	gear.

He	was	still	hesitant	to	walk	there	alone,	but	he	figured	he	would	be	safe	in	the midst	of	a	crowded	resort.	Besides,	he	knew	Jordan	would	be	along	momentarily

which	calmed	him	a	bit.

As	 the	 elevator	 door	 closed	 he	 heard	 the	 distinctive	 chime	 of	 his	 phone	 go off	that	indicated	he	was	receiving	a	text.	He	pulled	his	phone	out	and	looked	at the	screen.	The	blood	drained	from	his	face.

“We	know	what	you’ve	been	up	to,”	the	message	said.	Dillon	felt	his	knees

go	weak.	Then	the	phone	rang	and	he	felt	the	elevator	suddenly	stopped,	but	the

door	didn’t	open.	The	phone	rang	and	rang	as	he	pushed	the	open	door	button.

Nothing.	All	the	phone	said	was,	“Unknown	Caller.”

He	let	it	ring	until	his	voicemail	picked	it	up.	Silence.	He	could	feel	his	heart pound	in	his	chest	and	could	hear	his	breathing.	He	pushed	the	open	door	button

again.	Nothing.	Then	the	phone	rang	again.	“Unknown	Caller,”	it	said	again.

He	slid	the	bar	on	the	touch	screen	and	put	the	phone	to	his	ear.	“Hullo,”	he

said,	his	voice	barely	audible.

“Hi	 Dillon,”	 came	 the	 reply.	 The	 voice	 was	 deep	 and	 unnatural.	 It	 was obviously	being	masked	by	a	voice	changing	device.	“We	know	that	you’ve	been

looking	into	things	that	a	boy	your	age	shouldn’t	concern	himself	with.”

Dillon	was	silent,	not	knowing	how	to	respond.

“Why	 don’t	 you	 just	 enjoy	 your	 vacation	 with	 your	 family.	 I’m	 sure	 they wouldn’t	want	you	to	get	hurt.”	There	was	a	long	pause	as	Dillon	was	too	scared

to	say	anything.	“And	I’m	sure	you	wouldn’t	want	anything	to	happen	to	them,

would	you?”

The	elevator	door	suddenly	opened	and	Dillon	shrieked	as	a	little	girl	about

Gwen’s	 age	 ran	 into	 the	 elevator	 with	 her	 Dad	 startling	 him.	 The	 girl’s	 Dad actually	flinched	a	little	at	Dillon’s	outburst.

“You	okay	kid?”	he	asked	as	he	carefully	moved	around	Dillon.

Dillon	nodded	his	head	rapidly	as	he	ran	out	into	the	hallway	and	toward	his

room.	He	burst	through	the	door	and	slammed	it	shut	behind	him.

What	 is	 happening	 here! he	 screamed	 in	 his	 head.	 He	 took	 a	 few	 deep breaths	in	order	to	calm	himself	down.	When	he	was	able	to	think	clearly	again

he	replayed	the	conversation	in	his	mind.

“Okay	 …	 okay	 …”	 he	 said	 aloud.	 “Obviously	 these	 people,	 whoever	 they

are,	 don’t	 want	 me	 snooping	 around.”	 He	 paused,	 deep	 in	 thought.	 “Which	 is probably	because	there	 is	something	they	don’t	want	me	to	find.”	It	was	weird	to him,	 but	 that	 line	 of	 reasoning	 seemed	 to	 calm	 him	 down	 more	 and	 actually intrigued	him.

“But	what	about	the	veiled	threat?”	he	voiced.	Now	he	knew	he	was	stuck.

He	 didn’t	 want	 anyone	 to	 get	 hurt,	 especially	 his	 family,	 but	 he	 had	 a	 strong desire	to	find	out	what	these	people	were	hiding.

Would	 they	 actually	 harm	 a	 twelve	 year	 old	 kid? 	 he	 mused.	 “Well	 if	 the coyotes	were	any	indication,”	he	said	aloud	as	he	started	to	pace,	“then	I	guess the	answer	is	yes.”

He	flopped	down	on	his	bed.	No,	he	realized.	The	risk	was	too	much	for	him



to	keep	going	with	this.	The	man	on	the	phone	only	warned	him	to	stop	which

implied	 that	 if	 he	 got	 out	 now	 then	 nothing	 bad	 would	 happen	 and	 he	 could enjoy	the	rest	of	his	vacation.

He	grabbed	the	watch	from	his	pack	and	looked	at	it,	rubbing	his	thumb	over

the	initials	‘JTS.’	The	one	thing	he	couldn’t	figure	out	is	who	was	the	one	who

made	 sure	 he	 would	 find	 this?	 That	 thought	 troubled	 him	 as	 it	 suggested	 that there	was	someone	pushing	him	in	this	direction,	but	he	knew	now	he	couldn’t

go	where	they	wanted	him	to.	He	would	have	to	give	up	the	chase.

“Sorry	 John,”	 he	 said	 as	 he	 put	 the	 watch	 back.	 “I’m	 sure	 someone	 else	 is looking	for	you.”

DILLON	FELT	 AS	 THOUGH	 A	 WEIGHT	 HAD	 BEEN	 LIFTED	 OFF	 HIS	 CHEST	 NOW	 THAT

he	 had	 made	 the	 decision	 to	 leave	 the	 mystery	 alone,	 and	 he	 was	 actually enjoying	 himself	 at	 the	 pool	 with	 his	 family.	 He	 was	 still	 confused	 about	 the dreams	he	was	having,	but	he	put	them	out	of	his	mind	and	decided	to	focus	on

having	fun	and	enjoy	his	vacation.	After	an	hour	of	pool-time	the	Hunts	boarded

the	 bus	 and	 headed	 to	 town.	 The	 town	 site	 was	 actually	 really	 kind	 of	 quaint.

There	were	nice	houses	scattered	about	and	many	residents	were	out	and	about

on	their	daily	business.	Tons	of	tourists	walked	through	town	and	into	the	many

shops	 that	 were	 splayed	 throughout.	 There	 was	 one	 big	 strip	 in	 the	 downtown core	 where	 most	 of	 the	 touristy	 shops	 were.	 The	 bus	 rolled	 through	 downtown then	took	another	side	street	which	led	right	to	the	amusement	park.

The	park	itself	was	full	of	rides	and	games.	Much	like	what	you	would	see	at

any	amusement	park.	In	fact	it	seemed	really	out	of	place	from	the	rest	of	Oasis.

Most	 of	 the	 place	 was	 quiet	 and	 serene	 whereas	 the	 park	 was	 wild,	 loud,	 and entertaining.	It	was	obviously	put	here	in	order	to	generate	more	money	for	the

town	by	keeping	the	tourists	happy.	And	boy	did	it	ever	attract	the	tourists!	The place	was	packed!

At	the	entrance	to	the	grounds	the	people	who	were	staying	at	the	hotel,	like

the	Hunts,	checked	in	to	acquire	their	bracelets	which	allowed	them	access	to	the



rides	 and	 provided	 a	 way	 to	 charge	 their	 room	 for	 the	 items	 they	 purchased.

Dillon	thought	this	was	a	really	slick	way	of	doing	it.

“Okay,	we	all	need	to	stay	together”	Mom	stated	as	they	entered.

Jordan	rolled	his	eyes.	A	move	that	Mom	didn’t	see,	but	Dad	saw	it	and	got

the	message.	He	gave	the	boys	a	wink.	“I	think	the	boys	can	go	off	on	their	own

if	they	want.	We	can	always	have	them	do	a	check	in	text,	honey.”

Mom	paused	for	a	moment	before	responding.	“Well,	okay	…	I	guess,”	she

conceded.

“You	guys	have	fun	but	make	sure	you	stay	together,”	Dad	put	in,	trying	to

calm	Mom’s	hesitancy.

Jordan	and	Dillon	nodded.

“And	give	us	a	call	if	you	have	any	problems,”	Mom	put	in.

Jordan	sighed.	“You	guys	worry	too	much,”	he	replied.	“Come	on	twerp,”	he

turned	to	Dillon	and	motioned	for	him	to	follow.

THE	 PARK	 DEFINITELY	 EXCEEDED	 ALL	 THE	 BOY’S	 EXPECTATIONS!	 JORDAN	 AND

Dillon	 went	 on	 ride	 after	 ride,	 scarfed	 down	 cotton	 candy,	 ice	 cream,	 and	 pop, and	even	managed	to	get	in	a	few	of	those	carny	games	that	most	people	can’t

win	at.	The	only	damper	to	the	fun	was	when	they	were	riding	the	Ferris	Wheel

and	got	stuck!	They	were	nearing	the	bottom	when	the	power	suddenly	cut	out.

“You	 gotta	 be	 kidding!”	 they	 heard	 one	 of	 the	 ride	 conductors	 exclaim	 in exasperation.	 “These	 power	 outages	 have	 been	 occurring	 more	 frequently.

Someone	has	to	fix	this!”

His	co-conductor	nodded	in	agreement	as	they	both	busied	themselves	with

making	sure	all	the	switches	were	in	the	right	position.

As	 Dillon	 looked	 around	 he	 noticed	 that	 it	 wasn’t	 just	 their	 ride	 that	 was down,	but	that	the	whole	park	was	taking	a	hit.

“Man!	I’d	hate	to	be	those	guys	in	the	rollercoaster	right	now,”	Jordan	said

with	a	laugh	as	he	pointed	over	to	where	the	coaster	was.	It	didn’t	get	enough	of a	boost	half	way	through	the	track	in	order	to	make	it	through	some	of	the	twists

and	turns	and	so	some	of	the	riders	were	stuck	in	awkward	positions.

Dillon	nodded	his	agreement.	Thankfully	all	these	outages	seemed	to	be	only

for	a	brief	time,	but	he	thought	that	it	was	weird	that	a	resort	this	sophisticated would	 be	 having	 this	 many	 power	 problems.	 Then	 again,	 they	 really	 were literally	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 desert—hundreds	 of	 miles	 away	 from	 any	 other civilization,	and	Tara,	the	bike	shop	lady,	did	mention	that	they	were	upgrading the	system	which	should	solve	these	problems.

“Hey	man,	you	hungry?”	Jordan	said	to	Dillon	after	they	finally	were	able	to

exit	the	ride	when	the	power	came	back	on.

Dillon	looked	at	him	in	disbelief!	“After	all	that	stuff	we	just	ate	you’re	still hungry?”	he	scoffed.

“Ya,”	Jordan	replied.	“I’m	sixteen	you	know,”	he	said	as	though	that	should

have	 explained	 it	 all.	 “Don’t	 worry	 twerp,	 you’ll	 be	 the	 same	 way	 in	 a	 few years.”

Dillon	 was	 sceptical	 as	 he	 never	 could	 understand	 how	 someone	 Jordan’s size	(which	was	pretty	average)	could	put	away	so	much	food	and	have	nothing

to	show	for	it!

“Why	 don’t	 you	 grab	 a	 spot	 for	 us	 over	 there.”	 Jordan	 motioned	 to	 an outdoor	patio	area.

Dillon	worked	his	way	through	the	crowd	and	found	an	empty	table	by	the

railing	on	the	edge	of	the	area	beside	the	walkway	that	led	through	the	park.	This amusement	 park	 was	 a	 much	 needed	 distraction	 for	 the	 young	 boy	 in	 order	 to help	 get	 his	 mind	 off	 things.	 But	 anytime	 he	 had	 a	 moment	 to	 himself	 his thoughts	 started	 to	 drift	 to	 the	 circumstances	 he	 had	 been	 a	 part	 of.	 And	 every time	 he	 sat	 down,	 he	 would	 feel	 the	 exhaustion	 of	 poor	 sleep	 creeping	 up	 on him.	 He	 still	 wondered	 how	 he	 would	 be	 able	 to	 get	 help	 in	 dealing	 with	 the situation.	He	took	a	deep	breath	and	remembered	that	all	he	had	to	do	was	stay

out	of	it.	Even	so	he	was	really	troubled	by	the	fact	that	he	was	almost	killed	and he	couldn’t	even	tell	his	parents	about	it!	Jordan,	the	only	one	in	his	family	who he	thought	might	remotely	believe	him,	except	for	Gwen—	who	would	be	of	no

help	 to	 him—had	 dismissed	 his	 supposedly	 “wild	 imaginary	 adventure.”	 He knew	 something	 strange	 was	 going	 on	 and	 that	 someone	 had	 targeted	 him

specifically.	The	thought	frightened	him.	He	shook	his	head. Just	stay	out	of	it, he	reminded	himself	again.

“You	 having	 fun?”	 came	 a	 man’s	 voice.	 Dillon	 jumped	 a	 little	 as	 he	 was jolted	 from	 his	 thoughts.	 He	 looked	 up	 to	 see	 those	 piercing	 blue	 eyes	 and shaven	 scalp	 which	 sported	 the	 asian	 writing	 tattoo	 he	 had	 seen	 a	 couple	 days earlier	in	the	stairway.	It	was	Derek!

“Oh	 …	 sorry	 for	 startling	 you,”	 Derek	 replied	 with	 a	 smile.	 “I	 just	 saw	 a friendly	face	and	thought	you	could	use	some	company.”

“It’s	…	ah	…	okay,”	Dillon	responded,	trying	to	collect	himself.

“You	 looked	 like	 you	 were	 deep	 in	 thought,”	 Derek	 prodded.	 “Everything okay?”

“Ya	…	ya	…	I	was	just	…	just	thinking	about	the	next	ride	I	was	going	to

take.”

“You	know,”	began	Derek,	“you’re	a	terrible	liar	Dillon.”

Dillon	 was	 dumbfounded!	 He	 didn’t	 know	 what	 to	 say	 next!	 Derek	 had

called	him	out	and	he	was	like	a	mouse	trapped	in	a	corner	with	a	huge	cat	ready to	pounce	on	him.	He	was	frightened.	Then	it	struck	him.	That	voice!	He	knew

that	voice!	Derek	was	the	one	who	was	talking	to	Tom	Tom!

Dillon	squirmed,	not	knowing	what	to	say	next.

“Don’t	 worry	 Dillon,”	 Derek	 finally	 said	 at	 length,	 “you	 and	 I	 are	 on	 the same	 team.”	 He	 smiled	 and	 leaned	 casually	 on	 the	 railing,	 trying	 to	 disarm	 the kid.

“I	 …	 but	 …”	 Dillon	 tried	 desperately	 to	 say	 something	 but	 it	 just	 wasn’t coming	out.

“Don’t	say	anything,”	Derek	replied.	“Just	listen.	If	you	do	that	then	a	lot	of

your	questions	will	be	answered.	Understand?”

Dillon	nodded.

“I	 work	 for	 a	 group	 of	 people	 called	 The	 Orion	 Group	 who	 were	 assisting John	Taylor	Sebastian	to	find	something	for	us.	Obviously	the	people	who	have

what	 we	 need	 didn’t	 want	 Mr.	 Sebastian	 to	 discover	 it.”	 He	 paused	 for	 effect then	 said,	 “His	 disappearance,	 as	 I’m	 sure	 you’re	 aware	 of	 by	 now,	 was	 no accident.”	 He	 looked	 around,	 as	 though	 he	 was	 making	 sure	 that	 no	 one	 was

listening	in	on	them.	Dillon	looked	around	as	well	out	of	reflex.

Derek	 turned	 back	 to	 Dillon.	 His	 eyes	 almost	 piercing	 through	 him.	 “We were	 getting	 nowhere	 with	 our	 investigation	 and	 decided	 that	 your	 unique abilities	would	be	useful	to	us.”

“What	abilities?”	Dillon	asked.

“You	 can	 find	 things,	 Dillon.	 Things	 no	 one	 else	 seems	 to	 be	 able	 to	 find.

And,	 with	 you	 looking	 with	 us,	 we’re	 certain	 we	 can	 find	 what	 we’re	 looking for.”

“I	don’t	want	trouble,”	Dillon	said.

“Unfortunately,	 our	 enemies	 have	 already	 noticed	 you	 poking	 around.	 You need	us,	Dillon,	just	like	we	need	you.	That’s	why	I’ve	chosen	to	make	contact.”

Dillon	swallowed	hard,	trying	to	digest	the	news.

“They	…	whoever	 they	are,	have	also	made	contact	and	warned	me	to	stay

away	from	this.”

Derek	look	hard	at	him.

“They	threatened	harm	to	me	and	my	family	if	I	didn’t	drop	it.”

“My	 employer	 doesn’t	 want	 to	 see	 that	 happen,”	 Derek	 was	 quick	 to	 add,

“and	we	can	offer	protection	until	this	thing	is	over,”	he	said,	trying	to	reassure the	young	boy.	“But	we	need	the	use	of	your	gifts.”

Dillon	had	about	a	thousand	questions	he	wanted	to	asked	but	none	of	them

would	surface	as	he	was	still	in	shock	by	Derek’s	admissions.

Derek	 must	 have	 noticed	 this	 by	 the	 look	 on	 Dillon’s	 face.	 “Yes,”	 he	 said,

“we	 were	 the	 ones	 who	 got	 your	 family	 the	 free	 vacation.	 I	 planted	 the	 watch that	 you	 found	 when	 you	 were	 playing	 in	 the	 forest	 by	 your	 house,	 and	 I	 was also	 the	 one	 who	 dropped	 the	 arrow	 head	 for	 you	 to	 find	 in	 the	 gas	 station parking	lot.	These	are	all	items	of	John’s	we	managed	to	acquire	and	we	are	sure they’re	 clues	 to	 finding	 where	 he	 was	 taken,	 but	 without	 your	 help	 we	 don’t think	we	will	be	able	to	do	this.”

“But	how	did	you	know	I	was	going	to	find	them?”	Dillon	was	able	to	ask.

Derek	smiled.	“By	all	accounts	It	was	guaranteed	that	you	would	find	them

due	to	the	gifts	you	possess.”

“By	 whose	 account?	 How	 do	 you	 know	 me?	 How	 long	 have	 you	 been

watching	me?	What	are	these	gifts	you	keep	talking	about?”	Dillon	blurted.

Derek	waved	a	hand	in	the	air	trying	to	signal	for	Dillon	to	lower	his	voice.

“I	don’t	have	time	to	explain	this	to	you.	All	you	need	to	do	is	agree	to	help	us.

We	can’t	do	this	without	you.”

Dillon	was	silent.	Again,	Sarah’s	voice	rang	out	in	his	head	in	warning,	and

so	did	the	deep-voiced	man.

“John	needs	you,”	Derek	emphasized.	“We	think	he’s	still	alive	but	he	might

not	be	for	much	longer	if	we	can’t	find	out	what	happened	to	him.	Whether	you

choose	to	help	us	or	not,	you	and	your	family	are	now	in	danger.	These	people

won’t	stop	at	a	threat.	And,	as	I	said,	if	you	agree	to	help	us,	we	can	offer	you protection.”

That	 last	 statement	 removed	 all	 hesitation	 from	 Dillon	 and	 silenced	 Sarah and	 the	 deep-voiced	 man	 in	 his	 head.	 He	 truly	 did	 want	 to	 find	 out	 what happened	to	John,	and	if	he	was	able	to	do	something	to	help	save	the	man’s	life then	he	would	do	it.	He	just	hoped	that	Derek’s	offer	of	protection	was	enough	to keep	his	family	safe.

He	nodded.

“Great,”	replied	Derek.	“I	have	to	go	now,	but	I’ll	be	in	touch	real	soon.	We

have	to	act	quickly.”	With	that	Derek	spun	around	and,	before	walking	into	the

crowd	said,	“One	last	thing	Dillon.	Don’t	tell	anyone	about	this.	We	don’t	want

more	people	getting	hurt”

Dillon	 nodded	 as	 the	 blood	 drained	 from	 his	 face.	 That	 statement	 of	 them having	 to	 act	 quickly	 relieved	 Dillon	 a	 little	 as	 he	 now	 knew	 he	 had	 some direction	that	he	needed	to	pursue,	and	that	it	was	going	to	happen	soon,	but	the comment	about	“getting	hurt”	did	not	sit	well	with	him.	He	hated	the	idea	of	not knowing	 what	 to	 do.	 And	 he	 definitely	 wasn’t	 fond	 of	 the	 idea	 of	 getting	 hurt, whether	it	was	himself	or	someone	else.

“Hey	man,”	said	Jordan	as	he	approached	the	table	with	a	huge	tray	of	food

and	a	drink	for	Dillon.	“I	thought	you	could	use	this,”	he	said	as	he	placed	the monster	 drink	 in	 front	 of	 his	 brother.	 “Who	 was	 that	 you	 were	 talking	 to?”	 he asked.

“Who	…	oh	him?”	Dillon	tried	to	play	it	cool.	“No	one.	Just	a	guy	I	met	in

the	stairway	at	the	resort.	I	guess	he	remembered	me	from	a	couple	days	ago	and wanted	to	talk.”	Dillon	sucked	back	on	his	pop.

“Right	…	”	replied	Jordan	sceptically.

Man!	 I	 am	 terrible	 at	 this	 lying	 thing! Dillon	 lamented	 to	 himself.	 He continued	a	long	pull	on	his	straw	draining	half	his	drink	in	a	matter	of	seconds.

Jordan	stared	at	him	for	what	seemed	to	be	an	eternity	trying	to	get	him	to	share more.	Dillon	looked	away	pretending	to	be	interested	in	something	else.	Jordan

stared	for	another	second	then	unwrapped	his	lunch	and	began	eating.

“That’s	pretty	cool,”	Dillon	said	as	he	pointed	to	a	nearby	ride.

“Ah	huh,”	was	all	Jordan	said	with	a	mouth	full	of	food.

The	rest	of	the	time	that	Dillon	had	to	kill	watching	his	brother	eat	his	burger and	 avoid	 answering	 any	 direct	 questions	 was	 soooo	 painful!	 He	 knew	 that Jordan	didn’t	believe	him	and	he	wanted	to	tell	him	the	truth	because	maybe	he

would	 believe	 him	 this	 time,	 but	 he	 couldn’t.	 The	 last	 people	 he	 wanted	 to	 be harmed	 were	 members	 of	 his	 family—no	 matter	 how	 annoying	 they	 were	 at times.	 No.	 He	 knew	 he	 had	 to	 do	 this	 alone	 and	 trust	 in	 this	 stranger	 who	 had just	confided	in	him.	What	other	choice	did	he	have?





15

T H E 	 H A U N T E D 	 H O U S E

Derek	walked	into	the	small	restaurant	and	slipped	his	sunglasses	off,

stowing	 them	 on	 his	 neck	 with	 the	 glasses	 facing	 backward.	 He

quickly	 scanned	 the	 booths	 and	 noticed	 Jake	 sitting	 at	 the	 far	 table

seemingly	engrossed	in	something	he	had	pulled	up	on	his	tablet.	Derek	quickly

made	his	way	over	and	slipped	into	the	seat	opposite	Jake.

“Well?”	 came	 Jake’s	 immediate	 question	 without	 even	 looking	 away	 from

his	screen.

Derek	 paused	 for	 a	 moment	 before	 he	 responded.	 It	 wasn’t	 till	 Jake	 looked up	from	his	tablet	and	starred	Derek	in	the	eyes	that	he	spoke	what	was	on	his

mind.	 “I	 don’t	 like	 involving	 the	 boy.	 Can’t	 we	 call	 it	 off,	 send	 them	 away	 or something?”	he	stated	flatly.

“Why	the	sudden	change	to	heart?”	Jake	asked.

“Dillon	 has	 already	 been	 compromised,”	 Derek	 stated.	 “They	 have	 made

contact	 with	 him	 and	 warned	 him	 not	 to	 get	 involved	 or	 something	 bad	 will happen	to	him	or	his	family.”

“That’s	unfortunate,”	Jake	said,	rather	coldly.	“But	we	can’t	deviate	from	the

plan.	He	was	involved	the	moment	we	made	it	so	and	we	need	to	see	it	through.”

“We	 have	 to	 bring	 in	 some	 more	 operatives	 to	 help	 keep	 the	 Hunts	 safe now.”

Jake	nodded.	“I’ll	make	the	call.”

“We	 need	 them	 here	 right	 away,”	 Derek	 stated	 emphatically.	 “Dillon	 is	 in

real	danger	now,	and	it’s	only	a	matter	of	time	before	he	disappears	as	well.”

“Can	 I	 get	 you	 something?”	 said	 the	 waitress	 who	 noticed	 Derek	 come	 in and	sit	down	at	the	booth.

“Just	coffee,”	he	said	as	he	glanced	up	at	her.

She	smiled	softly	and	padded	away.

“You’ve	made	your	point	clear	Derek,”	Jake	continued	with	the	conversation

after	 the	 waitress	 left.	 “But	 do	 you	 really	 think	 they	 would	 be	 bold	 enough	 to take	a	twelve	year	old	boy	from	his	family	because	he’s	asking	a	few	questions?

I	 don’t	 think	 the	 resort	 would	 want	 that	 kind	 of	 publicity.”	 He	 almost	 seemed indignant	at	Derek’s	suggestion.

“I	 know	 they	 tried	 to	 kill	 Dillon	 once	 with	 the	 use	 of	 the	 necrotoxin enhanced	 creatures,”	 Derek	 stated.	 “I	 caught	 a	 glimpse	 of	 Dillon	 speeding through	the	desert	on	his	bike	when	I	was	heading	back	to	the	resort	after	talking with	Tom	Tom.	I	was	pulling	out	of	the	information	center	parking	lot	and	onto

the	 highway	 when	 I	 noticed	 a	 couple	 of	 the	 things	 in	 pursuit	 of	 him.”	 Derek paused	 as	 the	 waitress	 came	 over	 with	 his	 coffee.	 When	 she	 was	 gone	 out	 of earshot	he	continued.	“I	knew	Dillon	was	going	to	be	hard	pressed	to	make	it	so

I	tried	to	buy	him	some	time	by	firing	some	shots	at	the	creatures	in	order	to	get their	attention	while	Dillon	sped	away.	Thankfully	he	made	it.”

“And	that	was	lucky	for	us,”	Jake	cut	in.

Derek’s	eyes	went	wide.

“And	 of	 course	 lucky	 for	 the	 boy,”	 Jake	 was	 quick	 to	 add,	 trying	 to	 pacify Derek’s	shock	at	the	cold	statement.	“I	don’t	want	any	more	harm	to	come	to	the

boy	than	you	do,”	Jake	continued.	Derek	scoffed	at	that	remark,	having	had	a	lot of	 experience	 dealing	 with	 Jake	 over	 the	 years.	 “But	 …”	 Jake	 continued, dismissing	Derek’s	clear	sign	of	distrust	of	his	statement,	“…	we	need	him.	You

know	that	as	much	as	I	do.	Dillon	is	the	key	to	help	us	save	more	lives.”

Derek	 sat	 back	 in	 silence.	 After	 a	 moment	 of	 digesting	 the	 information	 he relaxed,	grabbed	his	coffee,	and	took	a	sip.	He	knew	Jake	was	right,	no	matter

how	much	he	hated	what	they	were	doing	to	the	boy.	The	problem	for	him	was

that	he	didn’t	realize	how	dangerous	this	mission	was	going	to	be	when	they	first conscripted	Dillon	who	was,	back	then,	totally	unaware	of	what	was	going	on	to



him.	Now	the	stakes	were	much	higher,	and	he	wasn’t	comfortable	with	them.

“Okay	then,”	Derek	said	finally.	“Where	do	we	go	from	here?”

Jake	smiled.	“We	move	to	the	next	stage	of	our	plan.	We	need	to	get	the	boy

to	the	house.”

AFTER	 JORDAN	 WAS	 FINISHED	 EATING,	 THE	 TWO	 BROTHERS	 DECIDED	 TO	 EXPLORE

the	other	side	of	the	park	they	haven’t	been	to	yet.	There	were	dozens	of	more

rides	 over	 there.	 They	 hit	 a	 couple	 of	 quick	 ones—the	 lines	 having	 died	 down during	 lunch—which	 the	 boys	 thought	 was	 awesome!	 As	 they	 walked	 through trying	to	plan	out	their	next	adrenaline	rush	Jordan	noticed	the	haunted	house.

“Awesome!”	he	said	as	he	ran	toward	it.	Dillon	followed	closely	behind.

As	they	approached	and	were	about	to	enter,	the	ride	operator	stopped	them.

He	was	a	short	middle-aged	man	with	greying	hair.	“Sorry	boys,	but	you	have	to

go	alone	on	this	ride.”

“What!	Why?”	Jordan	blurted.

“For	effect	of	course,”	was	the	man’s	reply.	“We	try	to	give	all	our	guests	the

best	 possible	 experience.	 And,	 obviously	 for	 a	 haunted	 house,	 the	 best experience	is	to	scare	the	pants	off	you	 by	yourself.”

Dillon’s	 face	 went	 pale.	 He	 had	 enough	 frightful	 excitement	 so	 far	 on	 this trip.	He	wasn’t	sure	he	wanted	to	go	seeking	for	it	now.

“Oh	 awesome!”	 Jordan	 replied.	 “That’s	 a	 great	 setup.”	 He	 looked	 back	 at Dillon.	His	face	showed	that	he	didn’t	seem	keen	on	the	idea.	“You’re	not	scared are	you?”	he	chided.

“What	 …	 me	 …	 no,	 of	 course	 not,”	 he	 replied,	 trying	 to	 talk	 himself	 into manning	up	to	the	ride.

“Good.	 Because	 I’d	 hate	 for	 your	 friends	 at	 home	 to	 find	 out	 how	 you chickened	out	of	a	little	haunted	house	in	a	theme	park,”	Jordan	said,	implying

that	he	would	never	let	this	go	if	he	didn’t	go	in.

Dillon	swallowed	hard.	He	knew	what	he	had	to	do.	“Fine,”	he	said.	“I’ll	go

first.”	He	walked	up	to	the	entrance	and	into	the	house.

Before	 he	 entered,	 the	 operator	 of	 the	 house	 grabbed	 his	 arm.	 “This	 house isn’t	 for	 the	 feint	 of	 heart,”	 he	 said	 with	 a	 deadly	 serious	 tone.	 “Beware	 the demons,”	he	stated	as	he	let	go	of	him.

The	 door	 had	 the	 word	 “MURDER”	 written	 over	 it	 in	 what	 appeared	 to	 be blood,	and	there	were	ghostly	sounds	coming	from	different	directions	as	Dillon

approached.	 Of	 course	 Dillon	 knew	 that	 this	 was	 all	 part	 of	 the	 show.	 He	 had been	 in	 one	 of	 these	 houses	 before	 when	 he	 and	 his	 family	 visited	 the amusement	park	that	wasn’t	far	from	the	town	they	lived	in.	Still,	due	to	recent circumstances,	he	couldn’t	help	but	be	a	little	on	edge.

He	entered	and	the	place	was	dark	at	first	then	there	was	a	flash	of	light	and

something	 whipped	 across	 his	 path.	 He	 couldn’t	 make	 it	 out	 but	 figured	 that	 it was	 probably	 someone	 pretending	 to	 be	 a	 ghost.	 Then	 the	 lights	 came	 on	 and flickered	 in	 intermittent	 patterns	 simulating	 an	 electrical	 short.	 The	 hair	 on	 the back	 of	 Dillon’s	 neck	 stood	 up.	 The	 mood	 was	 creepy.	 The	 walls	 were	 stained with	 what	 appeared	 to	 be	 blood	 and	 there	 were	 fingernail	 marks	 down	 the	 one side,	portraying	as	though	someone	was	sucked	into	the	house	against	their	will.

There	was	a	musty	old	smell	in	the	air,	and	he	could	hear	really	faint	sounds	of high-pitched	shrieks	and	low	growls.

As	 Dillon	 walked	 down	 the	 corridor	 he	 felt	 something	 buzz	 his	 head	 from behind	and	continue	on	down	the	hall.	He	twitched	and	jumped	to	the	side,	eyes

searching	the	gloom.	“Must’ve	been	a	simulated	bat,”	he	reasoned	with	himself.

With	a	swallow,	he	pushed	on.

The	 sounds	 were	 getting	 louder:	 women	 screams,	 low	 guttural	 growls	 of

some	unseen	creature,	and	howling	of	souls	being	tormented.

He	got	to	the	end	of	the	hall	and	turned	the	corner.	As	he	did,	a	hand	came

out	 of	 the	 wall	 and	 touched	 his	 shoulder.	 He	 jumped	 and	 launched	 himself against	the	opposite	wall.	Two	more	hands	came	out	and	grabbed	him.	He	pulled

away;	his	heart	pounding	furiously. It’s	just	a	ride,	he	told	himself	as	he	tried	to keep	his	distance	from	the	edges	of	the	hallway	as	he	jogged	away	from	where

the	hands	were.	He	hit	something	sticky:	spider	webs!	As	he	pulled	them	from

his	face	he	noticed	that	the	hall	opened	up	to	the	top	and	the	path	wound	down.

At	the	top	of	the	opened	hall	was	a	huge	spider.	He	let	out	a	shriek	and	jumped

back,	suddenly	having	the	image	in	his	head	about	the	spiders	he	and	Gwen	were running	from	in	his	dreams.	In	its	legs	appeared	to	be	the	body	of	a	person	that was	being	wound	up	in	its	web.	He	rubbed	his	eyes	then	looked	closer	at	it.	No.

He	could	tell	that	it	was	definitely	a	fake	by	the	way	the	thing	moved.	His	breath came	 easier	 and	 his	 heart	 slowed	 as	 he	 calmed	 himself	 down.	 “Get	 it	 together Dillon.	This	is	just	a	ride ,” he	said	aloud	to	himself.

Dillon	put	his	head	down	and	ran	under	the	spider.	As	he	came	out	the	other

side	 he	 thought	 he	 saw	 movement	 of	 something	 off	 to	 the	 side.	 He	 noticed	 a large	 vent	 at	 the	 base	 of	 the	 wall	 to	 his	 left	 and	 swore	 he	 saw	 movement	 from within,	and	a	flicker	of	yellow.	He	didn’t	stay	there	long	enough	to	figure	it	out and	instead	ran	to	the	end	of	the	hall	where	there	was	a	closed	door.	Dillon	tried to	open	it	but	it	was	locked.	As	he	shook	it	he	heard	large	footsteps	coming	from behind	him.	He	glanced	back	to	see	a	massive	guy	who	had	to	have	been	at	least

seven	feet	tall	and	built	like	a	body	builder!	His	face	appeared	to	be	zombie-like: dead	 and	 rotting.	 And	 his	 clothes	 were	 tattered,	 blood-satined,	 and	 barely hanging	 on.	 He	 lumbered	 toward	 Dillon	 methodically.	 In	 his	 massive	 arms	 he held	a	wicked	looking	axe.	It	was	huge	with	a	serrated	edge	and	had	a	point	on	it that	was	probably	a	foot	long	with	cruel	looking	barbs	all	over	it.	Dillon	worked the	 door	 harder.	 The	 zombie	 was	 almost	 there.	 He	 tugged	 and	 pushed.	 He glanced	back	and	saw	that	the	zombie	was	raising	his	axe.

“This	is	just	a	ride,”	he	said	to	himself	again.	“Come	on!”	he	screamed	at	the

door.

The	zombie	had	his	axe	fully	overhead. Was	this	just	a	ride? Dillon	began	to question	himself.	He	pushed	hard	on	the	door.	It	flung	open	and	Dillon	fell	into the	room	beyond	just	as	the	zombie’s	axe	came	down.	He	heard	the	thud	of	it	hit

the	floor	and	the	door	slammed	shut	on	its	own.	Dillon	breathed	a	sigh	of	relief, then	pulled	himself	up.

He	 noticed	 that	 he	 was	 in	 a	 octagonal-shaped	 room.	 Each	 side	 of	 the	 room had	full-length	mirrors	on	them	which	reached	all	the	way	to	the	roof;	about	ten feet	from	the	floor.	As	he	looked	into	the	mirrors	he	noticed	something	strange: there	 were	 images	 of	 disembodied	 people	 coming	 up	 behind	 him.	 He	 turned around,	 but	 no	 one	 was	 actually	 there.	 Now	 looking	 in	 the	 opposite	 mirror,	 he

noticed	 the	 same	 thing.	 The	 figures	 were	 of	 attractive	 women	 who	 were seemingly	moving	their	hands	over	his	head	and	shoulders.	It	was	weird	because

he	 started	 to	 actually	 feel	 as	 though	 there	 was	 something	 touching	 him.	 He swatted	 where	 he	 felt	 the	 sensations	 but	 nothing	 changed.	 This	 went	 on	 for	 a moment	 as	 he	 looked	 into	 different	 mirrors.	 As	 he	 stared	 into	 one	 the	 woman looked	 at	 him,	 then	 her	 eyes	 went	 red,	 and	 she	 bared	 some	 massive	 fangs	 and hissed	at	him!	He	could	hear	the	sound	of	the	hissing	as	though	it	was	right	on

top	of	him.	Dillon	jumped	back	and	looked	somewhere	else,	but	that	woman	did

the	same	thing.	He	spun	around	and	almost	screamed	out.	It	was	as	though	they

were	taunting	him.	This	went	on	for	what	seemed	an	eternity.	Eventually	Dillon

closed	his	eyes.	After	a	few	seconds	the	sounds	of	horror	stopped	and	he	could

feel	that	the	entire	floor	he	was	on	was	moving	up.	He	opened	his	eyes	to	see	the mirrors	 fade	 from	 view	 as	 he	 ascended.	 Before	 the	 last	 of	 the	 mirrors disappeared,	he	caught	the	glimpse	of	something	yellow.	His	heart	began	to	race.

It	was	at	this	point	that	the	young	boy	wanted	off	the	ride,	but	he	knew	there

was	no	way	back.	He	had	to	complete	what	he	started.	The	floor	came	to	stop	in

a	creepy	looking,	low	lit,	ancient	library.	There	were	bookshelves	against	three of	the	walls,	a	desk	was	over	to	the	right,	and	there	appeared	to	be	a	body	laying on	the	desk	with	a	knife	sticking	out	of	its	back.

“Great	…”	Dillon	found	himself	say	aloud	as	he	noticed	the	body.

He	looked	around	the	room	and	noted	that	the	door	was	behind	him.	He	had

no	 desire	 to	 check	 out	 the	 real-looking	 body!	 He	 just	 turned	 right	 for	 the	 door.

As	 he	 reached	 for	 the	 handle	 a	 knife	 landed	 in	 the	 door,	 missing	 his	 head	 by inches!	He	spun	around	to	see	a	ghoulish-looking	creature	crouched	on	the	desk

beside	the	dead	man.	He	was	flipping	another	knife	in	his	hand.	Dillon	went	for

the	 handle	 again.	 Another	 knife	 slammed	 into	 the	 door.	 Dillon’s	 heart	 was pounding.	Mostly	because	he	was	now	wondering	if	this	was	part	of	the	ride	or	if this	guy	was	actually	trying	to	kill	him!

He	 quickly	 grabbed	 the	 handle	 and	 pulled.	 “Of	 course!”	 he	 lamented	 out loud.	“Why	would	the	stupid	door	open	in	a	haunted	house?”

The	 ghoul	 smiled	 as	 he	 flipped	 another	 knife	 in	 the	 air.	 Then	 the	 book shelves	 started	 to	 moved	 back	 and	 forth	 and	 books	 started	 to	 fly	 all	 over	 the

place.	Dillon	noticed	that	there	was	a	passage	behind	one	of	the	shelves.	He	ran for	 the	 opening.	 A	 knife	 landed	 near	 him	 and	 the	 shelf	 closed	 over	 the passageway.	It	began	to	open	again	and	another	knife	landed	near	him.	He	had	to

dodge	some	of	the	flying	books	as	well.	One	hit	him	in	the	arm	and	he	noted	that it	felt	more	like	styrofoam	than	an	actual	book.	This	helped	him	remember	that	it was	 just	 a	 ride.	 The	 passage	 opened	 again	 and	 he	 launched	 himself	 through.	 It closed	behind	him	leaving	him	in	the	dark	for	a	second,	then	the	lights	came	on; a	really	dull	red	light	that	barely	lit	up	the	hall.

Okay,	I’ve	had	enough	of	this, 	he	thought	to	himself. Time	for	the	ride	to	end.

The	long	hallway	looked	rather	plain.	It	appeared	to	be	built	of	rotting	wood

that	could	fall	apart	at	any	moment.	There	were	three	windows	on	each	side	of

the	hallway	which	had	tattered	sheets	hanging	across	them	that	were	swaying	in,

what	 seemed	 to	 be,	 a	 breeze	 from	 the	 outside.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 hallway	 there was	a	large	hole	in	the	wall	with	a	big	sign	over	it	that	read	“Escape!”	The	sign was	huge,	appeared	to	be	written	in	blood,	and	was	glowing	brightly	in	the	dimly lit	passage.	But	the	eeriest	thing	was	that	the	faint	sounds	of	high-pitched	shrieks and	 low	 growls	 had	 disappeared,	 leaving	 him	 looking	 down	 the	 long	 hall	 with just	the	sound	of	the	breeze	coming	through	the	windows.

As	Dillon	took	his	first	step	he	heard	the	floor	boards	creek	loudly	under	his

weight.	 As	 he	 walked	 slowly	 down	 the	 hallway	 he	 began	 to	 hear	 ghoulish screams	and	groans	coming	from	the	hole.	“Oh	that’s	better!”	he	said	to	himself

sarcastically.	Then	he	saw	movement	to	the	left	at	that	top	of	the	wall.	There	was another	vent.	As	he	stared	at	the	vent	for	a	moment	he	suddenly	saw	two	yellow

dots	appear,	almost	like	eyes	staring	at	him.

He	 turned	 from	 the	 vent	 and	 started	 to	 pick	 up	 the	 pace	 as	 he	 went,	 not wanting	to	draw	this	out	anymore.	When	he	walked	by	one	of	the	windows	he

moved	 the	 sheet	 aside	 slightly	 and	 noticed	 that	 the	 windows	 were	 barred.	 He also	 noted	 the	 many	 people	 strolling	 up	 and	 down	 the	 boardwalk	 beside	 the haunted	house.	They	appeared	to	be	having	fun	going	from	ride	to	ride,	game	to

game.	 How	 he	 wanted	 to	 be	 outside	 again!	 He	 refocussed	 on	 the	 exit	 and increased	 his	 pace	 even	 more.	 Suddenly	 a	 trap	 door	 opened	 from	 above	 and	 a body	 that	 was	 strung	 up	 with	 a	 rope	 around	 his	 neck	 came	 crashing	 down	 in

front	 of	 him.	 It	 was	 pale,	 covered	 in	 blood,	 and	 seemed	 very	 realistic.	 Dillon jumped	 back	 and	 another	 one	 dropped	 from	 behind	 him.	 They	 began	 to	 extend their	arms.

Dillon	 dodged	 around	 the	 one	 in	 front	 and	 another	 two	 dropped.	 He	 threw himself	against	the	wall	and	squirmed	by	them.	He	was	only	a	few	yards	away

from	the	escape	hole	now.	He	rushed	toward	it	and	another	two	dropped	before

he	got	there	but	he	burst	through,	trying	not	to	touch	them	as	much	as	he	could.

He	knew	in	his	head	that	they	weren’t	real	but	he	couldn’t	resist	being	freaked

out	in	the	moment.	His	emotions	took	charge	and	not	his	logic.

He	made	it	to	the	hole	and	was	about	to	climb	inside	when	he	heard	a	sickly

hissing	sound	come	from	behind.	He	knew	he	shouldn’t	look	but	he	just	couldn’t

resist	 his	 curiosity.	 He	 turned	 his	 head	 back	 to	 see	 a	 giant-looking	 rat	 with glowing	 yellow	 eyes	 quickly	 dodging	 through	 the	 field	 of	 corpses	 and	 coming right	for	him.	That	was	it!	Dillon	had	enough	and	launched	himself	into	the	hole headfirst.

He	felt	himself	sliding.	He	realized	then	that	the	escape	was	actually	a	slide.

He	felt	himself	tumbling	and	turning	as	the	slide	went	to	the	left	and	then	to	the right.	It	was	dimly	lit	inside	from	small	pinholes	that	were	in	the	top	of	it	which apparently	let	the	natural	light	from	outside	come	in	to	illuminate	enough	of	the interior	 so	 that	 the	 rider	 could	 see	 a	 little	 as	 he	 slid	 down	 the	 twisting	 turning ride.

Dillon	screamed	as	he	tumbled.	He	knew	at	this	point	that	the	slide	was	not

meant	 for	 you	 to	 go	 down	 on	 your	 stomach	 but,	 unfortunately,	 he	 was	 now committed	 as	 he	 twisted	 and	 turned,	 scraping	 a	 hand	 here	 and	 a	 knee	 there.

Dillon	turned	sharply	to	the	right	and	then	burst	through	the	exit	which	had	wide strips	of	dark	soft	plastic	material	hanging	down	from	the	roof	which	worked	as

the	covering	for	the	door.

The	light	of	the	outside	stung	his	eyes	as	he	flew	through	the	door.	He	found

himself	on	the	side	of	the	haunted	house	at	the	end	of	the	slide	that	was	cleverly decorated	as	a	graveyard.	No	one	walking	by	could	see	the	slide	exit	so	as	not	to ruin	the	surprise	for	those	who	go	through	the	house.

He	pulled	himself	from	the	slide	and	promptly	made	it	through	the	exit	and

around	 to	 the	 front	 of	 the	 house.	 The	 ride	 operator	 turned	 and	 smiled	 at	 the clearly	disturbed	boy.

“Well?”	he	asked	with	a	mischievous	smile.

“Well	what?”	Dillon	fumed.	“You	trying	to	kill	someone?”	he	yelled.

“I	told	you	that	the	house	is	not	for	the	feint	of	heart,”	the	operator	replied

without	concern.

“That’s	an	understatement!”	Dillon	exclaimed.

“What	 part	 scared	 you	 the	 most?”	 asked	 the	 operator.	 “The	 people	 we	 hire are	 very	 good	 at	 what	 they	 do	 and	 we	 have	 spared	 no	 expense	 for	 the	 visual effects	 like	 what	 you	 saw	 in	 the	 room	 of	 mirrors.	 I	 believe	 that’s	 my	 favourite part,”	he	said	tipping	his	nose	up	slightly	in	a	smug	expression.

“Oh	ya	…	very	good,”	replied	Dillon	sarcastically.	Actually	he	did	think	that

the	 room	 of	 mirrors	 was	 very	 good,	 especially	 how	 they	 incorporated	 blasts	 of wind	around	you	which	helped	to	simulate	the	creatures	in	the	mirrors	touching

you.	 He	 silently	 berated	 himself	 for	 not	 keeping	 more	 cool	 and	 understanding that	was	what	they	were	doing	to	simulate	their	touch.	It	seemed	his	apparently

legendary	observational	skills	took	a	hike	when	he	was	under	emotional	distress!

“No	really	…	?”	asked	the	operator.	“What	was	the	scariest	part?”

Dillon	 had	 now	 sufficiently	 calmed	 down	 in	 order	 to	 think	 rationally	 about the	 question.	 He	 tilted	 his	 head	 down	 as	 he	 began	 to	 think. The	 knife	 throwing ghoul	was	pretty	scary, he	thought	to	himself. But	then	there	was	that	first	giant with	the	axe	…	No	…	I	would	have	to	say	…

Dillon	 turned	 to	 face	 the	 operator	 again.	 The	 operator	 looked	 at	 him	 with amusement.	“I	think	the	icing	on	the	cake	with	your	house	was	the	rat,”	Dillon

said	 with	 certainty.	 “Yep	 …	 The	 rat	 was	 the	 scariest	 even	 though	 I	 only	 saw	 it for	a	moment.”

The	operator	looked	perplexed.	“What	rat?”	he	asked.

Dillon	laughed.	“You	know	…	the	one	at	the	end?	You’re	just	trying	to	scare

me	more,”	he	chuckled.

The	operator	remained	stone-faced.	“We	don’t	have	a	rat	in	the	house.”

The	blood	drained	from	Dillon’s	face.	The	image	of	the	rat	came	clearly	to

him	again	and	he	noticed	the	same	kind	of	eyes	he	saw	in	the	coyotes!	He	knew

then	that	someone	had	tried	to	kill	him	again.	His	thoughts	spun. But	how	could it	survive	in	the	Oasis	without	bursting	into	flames?	And	why	are	they	still	after me	 as	 the	 guy	 on	 the	 phone	 said	 everything	 would	 be	 okay	 if	 I	 just	 stopped snooping	 around?	 Unless	 …	 someone	 saw	 me	 talking	 to	 Derek	 and	 they	 know that	Derek	is	somehow	involved!

Then	it	struck	him.	“Where’s	my	brother?”	he	blurted.

The	operator	turned	and	motioned	to	the	house	with	his	hand.

“No!”	Dillon	yelled	as	he	ran	to	the	front	door.

He	was	about	to	go	in	again	when	he	heard	a	loud	call	from	the	side.

“Where	you	going	twerp?”	came	Jordan’s	cry.

Dillon	 looked	 over	 to	 see	 Jordan	 walking	 toward	 them	 from	 the	 slide	 area.

His	heart	leaped	when	he	saw	his	brother	unharmed.	He	ran	over	and	was	about

to	give	him	a	hug	but	Jordan	quickly	shot	his	hand	out	and	smacked	him	in	the

chest.	“Whoa!”	Jordan	said.	“It	wasn’t	 that	 scary.	At	least	not	for	me.	Keep	your distance	little	bro.”

Dillon	quickly	collected	himself.	“Sorry.	I	…	um	…	thought	you	were	going

to	 need	 some	 comforting	 and	 a	 new	 pair	 of	 pants	 after	 that	 ride,”	 Dillon	 said, trying	to	be	cool.

“Sure	…”	Jordan	replied	with	a	smirk.	“Let’s	go	find	some	other	stuff	to	do.

“Thanks	 for	 the	 fright,	 creepy	 haunted	 house	 dude,”	 he	 waved	 to	 the	 operator.

The	 operator	 waved	 back	 as	 he	 watched	 the	 two	 brothers	 slip	 into	 the	 crowd once	more.





16

M O R E 	 Q U E S T I O N S , 	 F E W 	 A N S W E R S

Dillon’s	heart	wasn’t	into	any	more	rides	after	the	haunted	house.

Jordan	 tried	 to	 coax	 him	 into	 it	 but	 to	 no	 avail.	 Finally	 he	 just

dismissed	 his	 little	 brother	 and	 went	 on	 whatever	 rides	 he	 wanted.

Dillon	 waited	 dutifully	 at	 each	 one,	 constantly	 watching	 his	 back	 and	 jumping around	 at	 every	 little	 sudden	 sound	 that	 was	 around	 him.	 When	 Jordan	 got	 off the	ride	Dillon	would	try	and	act	as	cool	as	he	could,	dismissing	his	disinterest with	not	feeling	very	well.

Eventually	 Jordan	 played	 himself	 out	 and	 headed	 for	 the	 rendezvous	 point where	they	were	supposed	to	meet	Mom,	Dad,	and	the	girls.	As	it	would	happen

it	was	just	about	that	time	anyway.

As	 Dillon	 walked	 through	 the	 park	 he	 kept	 looking	 over	 his	 shoulder;	 his imagination	kept	running	off,	picturing	a	multitude	of	ways	he	was	about	to	die.

None	happened.

Mom,	 Dad,	 and	 the	 girls	 seemed	 excited	 about	 everything	 they	 saw	 at	 the park.	 Gwen	 wouldn’t	 stop	 talking!	 It	 was	 alright	 with	 Dillon	 though,	 as	 it	 kept any	attention	away	from	himself	so	he	wouldn’t	have	to	fake	being	as	excited	as

everyone	else.	At	this	point	he	just	wanted	to	get	back	to	the	resort	and	call	it	a night.	 The	 thing	 that	 really	 troubled	 him	 was	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 rat	 creature	 was able	to	somehow	survive	on	the	resort	property	without	exploding	into	a	ball	of

flames	 like	 the	 coyote	 did.	 The	 only	 way	 he	 could	 reason	 this	 out	 was	 that maybe	it	had	something	to	do	with	actually	touching	land?	And	if	it	did	have	to



do	 with	 touching	 land,	 who	 brought	 it	 there?	 And	 how	 closely	 was	 he	 being watched	that	they	anticipated	him	being	in	the	haunted	house	or	were	able	to	get in	 and	 release	 the	 rat?	 It	 seemed	 as	 sound	 an	 explanation	 as	 any,	 but	 without really	knowing	the	details	of	what	those	creatures	were,	and	who	it	was	that	was behind	this,	he	was	really	just	speculating.

As	soon	as	the	Hunts	made	it	back	to	the	resort	Dillon	hurried	to	the	elevator

without	saying	a	word.

“You	okay	Dillon,”	Dad	hollered	after	him.

“Ya.	I	just	really	have	to	go	to	the	washroom,”	he	yelled	back	without	even

turning	his	head.

“Okay,	 but	 don’t	 forget	 to	 meet	 us	 down	 here	 for	 dinner	 in	 an	 hour,”	 his Mom	called	after	him.

“Sure	thing,”	he	said	with	a	wave	as	he	disappeared	around	the	corner.

Dad	looked	to	Jordan.

“Well,	if	you	gotta	go,	you	gotta	go,”	Jordan	said	with	a	laugh.

HE	 WAS	 THINKING	 ABOUT	 MAKING	 SOME	 EXCUSE	 AS	 TO	 WHY	 HE	 COULDN’T	 GO,

but	then	he	thought	that	it	actually	might	be	better	for	him	to	be	out	in	a	public place	 where	 there	 were	 people	 around.	 After	 the	 coyote	 incident	 he	 was determined	to	do	just	that,	but	the	rat	caused	him	to	vacillate	back	and	forth	from wanting	 to	 be	 shut	 in,	 to	 thinking	 it	 was	 wiser	 to	 be	 around	 people.	 Every encounter	 he	 had	 to	 this	 point	 happened	 when	 there	 was	 no	 one	 around	 to witness	it	which	made	him	believe	that	the	people	behind	this	were	trying	to	be

as	evasive	as	possible.	So,	in	this	moment,	he	decided	that	he	should	be	around

as	many	people	as	he	could	be.

After	the	Hunts	got	settled	in	for	dinner	Dad	opened	the	conversation.	“So,

what	did	you	guys	like	best	about	today?”	he	asked.

Gwen	 went	 off	 again	 telling	 the	 family	 about	 everything	 she	 saw	 and	 did.

The	others	let	her	go	for	a	bit	then	Claire	cut	her	short.	“That’s	enough	Gwen,”

she	stated	in	an	exasperated	tone.	“You’ve	already	told	us	everything	twice!”

Gwen	 stopped	 talking	 but	 put	 on	 her	 pouty	 look.	 “Fine!”	 she	 stated	 as	 she crossed	her	arms.

“What	about	you	boys?”	asked	Mom.	“What	was	the	most	exciting	thing	you

did	at	the	park?”

Jordan	 smirked	 at	 Dillon.	 “I	 would	 have	 to	 say	 that	 it	 was	 the	 haunted house.”

“Wow!	A	haunted	house?”	Dad	asked	enthusiastically.

“Ya.	It	was	pretty	awesome,	though	I	think	Dillon	would	have	preferred	the

kids	carousel,”	he	said	with	a	laugh.

Dillon	scowled	at	him. If	only	he	knew,	he	thought	to	himself.

“You	see,	we	had	to	go	in	one	at	a	time	and	Dillboy	here	went	first.	It	must

have	scared	him	so	bad	that	when	I	was	done	he	came	running	over	to	give	me	a

hug	 and	 make	 sure	 I	 was	 okay!”	 Jordan	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 laugh	 when	 he recounted	the	incident.

“I	 was	 not	 scared!”	 Dillon	 blurted.	 “I	 just	 didn’t	 think	 that	 someone	 as	 big and	dumb	as	you	would	be	able	to	make	it	without	crapping	yourself!”

Jordan	slapped	Dillon	on	the	head.

“Boys!”	Mom	yelled.

They	 both	 glared	 at	 each	 other	 before	 going	 back	 to	 their	 appetizers	 and drinks.

After	 dinner	 the	 Hunts	 decided	 to	 hang	 out	 at	 the	 pool	 for	 a	 couple	 hours before	 turning	 in.	 They	 all	 went	 to	 their	 rooms	 and	 got	 changed	 in	 their	 swim gear	and	grabbed	their	towels.

“See	ya	down	at	the	pool	Dillboy!”	Jordan	said—seemingly	happy	with	the

new	nickname	he	had	come	up	with	for	his	brother—as	he	headed	out	the	door

of	their	room.

Dillon	finished	getting	changed,	grabbed	his	towel,	and	headed	to	the	pool.

As	 he	 was	 walking	 through	 the	 lobby	 by	 the	 front	 desk	 he	 heard	 someone	 call him	over.	He	jumped	a	little	at	the	sound	of	his	name	but	soon	collected	himself as	he	noticed	that	it	was	Janeen.

Dillon	 promptly	 jogged	 over	 to	 the	 desk.	 “What	 is	 it	 Janeen?	 Did	 you	 find out	what	that	symbol	means?”	he	asked	in	a	hushed	tone,	not	sure	who	might	be

listening	in.

Janeen	looked	at	him	curiously.	“Why	are	you	whispering?”	she	asked.

“Oh	 …	 uh	 …	 it’s	 just	 a	 habit	 I	 get	 into	 sometimes	 when	 I	 talk	 about	 stuff that’s	…	ah	…	interesting	and	mysterious,”	he	lied.

“Oh,	okay,”	she	responded	in	a	hushed	tone.	“Well,	I	found	out	that	no	one

really	 knows	 what	 this	 symbol	 means,”	 she	 said.	 “It	 was	 really	 weird	 actually when	I	was	asking	around	because	you	would	think	that	someone	knows	what	it

means,	 or	 even	 where	 it	 came	 from.	 Most	 people	 didn’t	 even	 notice	 it	 on	 the wall.	 I	 finally	 had	 to	 ask	 a	 friend	 of	 mine	 who	 I	 met	 when	 I	 first	 started	 here.

He’s	 an	 older	 guy	 who	 has	 been	 around	 for	 a	 while	 and	 I	 thought	 for	 sure	 he would	know	something,	but	he	didn’t.”

“Oh	…”	Dillon	replied	dejectedly.	“That’s	kind	of	a	bummer.”

“Ya,	tell	me	about	it.	He	seemed	really	curious	too	about	why	I	was	asking.”

Dillon’s	heart	skipped	a	beat	when	he	heard	that.	“And	what	did	you	say?”

he	prodded.

“I	told	him	that	you	were	asking	about	it,”	she	said	matter-of-factly.

Dillon	froze,	his	thoughts	spinning.

“I	figured	he	would	be	interested	in	one	of	his	guests	being	so	observant	as

we	have	never	had	that	question	before,”	Janeen	confessed	innocently.

“His	guests?”	Dillon	asked.

“Oh	yeah,”	Janeen	responded	with	a	wave.	“He’s	one	of	the	board	members

who	has	oversight	of	the	resort.	He’s	a	nice	old	man	who	loves	to	make	sure	that his	guests	have	a	great	time!”

Thanks! Dillon	 thought	 to	 himself	 as	 he	 started	 to	 wonder	 if	 the	 reason	 he seemed	to	have	a	target	on	himself	was	somehow	due	to	the	fact	that	others	now

knew	he	was	asking	questions.

“Oh	…	okay	thanks	Janeen,”	Dillon	said,	trying	to	be	as	upbeat	as	possible.

“No	problem!”	she	responded	with	a	big	smile.

Dillon	walked	away	in	a	daze,	not	sure	what	to	think.	Did	this	conspiracy	go

right	to	the	top?	How	else	would	someone	know	that	he	was	snooping	around?	It

just	 didn’t	 add	 up	 though	 that	 someone	 would	 risk	 exposure	 if	 something	 bad happened	to	a	twelve	year	old	kid	at	their	resort.	Dillon	knew	that	he	may	have

gotten	in	over	his	head,	but	in	reality,	it	wasn’t	his	fault.	It	was	Derek’s	and	those people	he	works	for.	Dillon	and	his	family	wouldn’t	even	be	here	if	it	weren’t	for them	 orchestrating	 the	 circumstances	 behind	 them	 coming	 to	 the	 resort.	 Dillon decided	 that	 Derek	 would	 have	 to	 answer	 a	 lot	 of	 questions	 when	 he	 made contact	with	him	next	time.

After	about	an	hour	of	hanging	out	by	the	pool	Dillon	started	to	relax	more.

He	even	went	and	played	an	epic	game	of	pool	dodge	ball	with	Gwen	and	some

other	 kids	 within	 his	 age	 range	 that	 he	 met	 poolside.	 He	 figured	 that	 no	 one would	 be	 stupid	 enough	 to	 try	 and	 attack	 him	 right	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 resort with	all	the	people	around.	That	thought	made	him	feel	safe.

The	 rest	 of	 his	 family	 seemed	 to	 be	 enjoying	 themselves	 too.	 As	 Dillon played,	the	recent	memories	of	his	ordeals	would	surface	for	a	moment,	but	then

he	would	repress	them	and	carry	on	with	the	fun	he	was	having.	Despite	all	of

his	thrill	and	desire	for	excitement	and	adventure,	he	was	beginning	to	just	enjoy being	a	kid	on	vacation	with	his	family.

He	 quickly	 jumped	 out	 of	 the	 pool	 for	 a	 moment,	 wiped	 himself	 with	 his towel,	and	grabbed	his	virgin	margarita.	He	sucked	back	on	the	straw	like	his	life depended	on	it.

“Come	on	Dillon!”	he	heard	Devon,	a	kid	who	was	about	his	own	age,	call

from	the	pool.

Dillon	 put	 his	 hand	 up	 indicating	 that	 he	 would	 just	 be	 a	 moment.	 He slammed	 the	 margarita	 cup	 down	 and	 was	 about	 to	 head	 back	 into	 the	 water when	he	heard	someone	behind	him	say,	“Mr.	Dillon	Hunt.	You	have	a	message

at	the	front	desk	for	you.”

Dillon	turned	to	see	one	of	the	bellman	standing	there.

“Who	could	that	be	from?”	Dillon’s	Mom	asked	as	she	looked	up	from	her

book.

“Who	 knows?”	 Dillon	 responded,	 trying	 to	 play	 it	 cool.	 He	 actually	 didn’t know	who	it	was	from,	and	even	feared	he	was	going	to	get	another	call	from	the

deepen-voiced	 man.	 “Oh	 …	 it’s	 probably	 from	 Sarah,”	 he	 said,	 trying	 to	 make up	 something	 on	 the	 fly.	 “She’s	 probably	 just	 wondering	 how	 I’m	 doing	 and didn’t	want	to	use	up	any	minutes	on	my	cell.”

“Well	that’s	courteous	of	her,”	Mom	said	as	she	returned	to	her	book.	“I’ve always	liked	that	girl.”

Dillon	rolled	his	eyes	and	headed	for	the	lobby. It’s	a	good	thing	Dad	wasn’t around	 to	 hear	 that,”	 Dillon	 thought	 to	 himself. He	 would	 have	 been	 a	 little more	suspicious.

As	 he	 approached	 the	 front	 desk	 and	 mentioned	 who	 he	 was,	 the	 guy	 there handed	him	a	note	and	said,	“The	man	who	left	this	was	insistent	that	I	give	it	to you	in	person	at	the	desk.”

“Oh	 …	 okay,”	 replied	 Dillon	 as	 he	 took	 the	 note,	 feeling	 a	 little

overwhelmed	with	the	apparent	seriousness	of	the	message.

He	 opened	 up	 the	 folded	 paper	 and	 all	 that	 was	 written	 on	 it	 was	 a	 phone number.

He	looked	back	to	the	guest	services	agent	who	was	already	busying	himself

at	the	computer.	“What	did	the	guy	look	like?”	he	asked.

The	 man	 thought	 for	 a	 moment.	 “The	 only	 thing	 I	 really	 recall	 was	 that	 he was,	caucasian,	muscular,	and	bald	with	an	odd	tattoo	on	his	head.

He	 immediately	 felt	 a	 sigh	 of	 relief	 inside	 of	 himself	 as	 he	 realized	 that	 it was	Derek.	He	rushed	over	to	the	business	center,	sat	himself	down	in	one	of	the cubicles,	 and	 was	 about	 to	 pick	 up	 the	 phone	 when	 a	 thought	 struck	 him.	 He immediately	 put	 the	 phone	 down.	 If	 the	 conspirators	 were	 the	 ones	 who	 were running	the	resort	then	of	course	they	would	probably	have	the	phones	tapped.

He	realized	that	he	would	need	to	use	his	cell	which	was	in	his	room.

Dillon	ran	over	to	where	his	stuff	was	poolside	and	grabbed	his	card-key.

“What’s	up?”	asked	Mom	as	she	looked	up	from	her	book	again.

“Oh	nothing,”	replied	Dillon.	“I	just	remembered	that	I	forgot	something	in

my	 room.”	 He	 darted	 away	 from	 her	 as	 quickly	 as	 possible,	 not	 giving	 her	 a chance	to	ask	anymore	questions.

He	ran	across	the	lobby	as	quickly	as	he	could	and	into	the	closest	available

elevator.	Even	though	his	room	was	only	a	few	floors	up	it	felt	as	if	the	elevator ride	would	last	for	an	eternity!	Finally	the	doors	opened	and	he	darted	down	the hall	 toward	 his	 room.	 As	 he	 got	 his	 card	 out	 he	 noticed	 that	 something	 wasn’t right:	his	door	was	already	unlocked	and	cracked	open	with	the	upper	secondary

door	lock	from	the	inside	opened	and	resting	on	the	frame!

Dillon	froze.	His	heart	pounded.	His	thoughts	whirled,	trying	to	remember	if

he	 was	 the	 one	 who	 left	 his	 door	 opened	 by	 accident	 when	 he	 exited.	 No.	 He remembered	 closing	 it	 tightly	 before	 heading	 to	 the	 pool	 and	 he	 didn’t	 think Jordan	 had	 come	 up	 yet.	 Someone	 else	 must	 have	 opened	 it	 after	 and,	 either didn’t	close	it	when	they	left,	or	were	still	in	there!

Despite	 his	 better	 judgement,	 Dillon	 took	 a	 couple	 deep	 breaths	 then,	 with one	 hand,	 opened	 the	 door	 slowly.	 He	 took	 a	 step	 inside	 and	 listened	 for	 a moment.	He	heard	nothing	except	for	the	low	buzz	of	the	air	conditioning	unit.

He	 felt	 the	 chill	 of	 the	 cool	 air	 on	 his	 damp	 shorts.	 “Hello!”	 he	 called	 out.	 “Is someone	there?”	No	response.

“Hello!”	he	called	out	again.	“I’m	packing	heat!”	he	warned.	“I	don’t	want

any	trouble.”

He	wasn’t	sure	if	that	was	water	from	the	pool	or	sweat	which	was	dripping

down	 his	 forehead.	 He	 took	 another	 step	 inside	 and	 peeked	 around	 the	 first corner	 that	 led	 to	 the	 bathroom.	 It	 was	 dark.	 He	 paused	 and	 listened	 but	 heard nothing.	He	approached	the	bathroom,	reached	for	the	light,	flicked	it	on	quickly, and	jumped	inside.

He	shrieked	and	fell	backward	as	he	saw	someone	staring	at	him!	His	heart

pounded	 faster	 as	 he	 fell	 back	 into	 the	 tub	 taking	 the	 shower	 curtain	 with	 him.

He	 grunted	 and	 shrieked,	 trying	 to	 get	 the	 curtain	 off	 of	 him,	 thinking	 that	 he was	about	to	be	leaped	upon	and	throttled	at	any	moment.	He	was	finally	able	to

rip	 the	 curtain	 off	 and	 pulled	 himself	 from	 the	 tub.	 It	 was	 only	 then	 that	 he realized	that	the	person	he	saw	was	himself	in	the	mirror!	He	chuckled.	Then	he

became	serious	once	more,	realizing	that	he	could	still	be	in	danger.

By	this	time	he	knew	that,	if	there	was	someone	in	the	room,	then	they	either

fled	 when	 he	 was	 wrestling	 with	 himself	 in	 the	 tub,	 or	 they	 were	 around	 the corner,	 ready	 to	 confront	 him.	 At	 this	 point	 he	 was	 starting	 not	 to	 care.	 He marched	around	the	corner	and	turned	on	the	light.	No	one	was	there.	He	looked

around	to	see	if	anything	was	out	of	place,	but	everything	seemed	normal	at	first glance.

He	went	to	his	side	table	and	grabbed	his	phone.	As	he	did,	he	noticed	that

his	 back	 pack	 wasn’t	 where	 it	 should	 have	 been.	 It	 was	 on	 the	 end	 of	 the	 bed instead	of	in	the	corner	with	his	suitcase	where	he	left	it,	and	the	top	zipper	was cracked	open.	He	knew	at	this	point	that	someone	was	looking	through	his	stuff.

Then	it	hit	him!	He	leaped	over	the	bed	and	reached	underneath	it	to	where	the

slight	rip	in	the	boxspring	was.	He	felt	around	for	a	moment	and	then	breathed	a sigh	of	relief	when	he	felt	that	the	watch	and	arrow	head	were	right	where	he	had hid	them.

He	unlocked	his	phone	and	dialled	the	number	on	the	paper.

“What	took	you	so	long	Dillon?”	Derek	asked	when	he	answered.

“Sorry,	I	wanted	to	make	sure	no	one	else	was	listening	in	so	I	went	to	my

room	to	use	my	cell.”

“Good	work	Dillon,”	Derek	replied.	“That	shows	a	level	of	maturity	beyond

your	years.”

“Thanks.	But	listen	Derek.	Someone	knows	I’m	involved.	I	didn’t	have	time

to	 tell	 you	 when	 we	 spoke	 the	 other	 day	 but	 they	 tried	 to	 kill	 me	 at	 the information	center	after	you	talked	to	Tom	Tom.	I	was	there,	and	when	you	left,

I	was	attacked	by	some	…	creatures,”	Dillon	explained.	“Tom	Tom	is	gone!”	His

voice	cracked	as	he	choked	up.

There	was	a	short	pause	on	Derek’s	end.	“I	know,”	Derek	admitted.	“I	saw

those	creatures	take	off	after	you	when	I	was	just	leaving	the	center.	All	I	could do	 was	 let	 a	 few	 shots	 go	 in	 order	 to	 buy	 you	 some	 time	 and	 hoped	 that	 you would	make	it	to	the	Oasis	before	they	caught	you.	And	you	did.”

“Did	you	know	that	the	creatures	can’t	come	onto	the	Oasis	property	without

burning	up?”	Dillon	asked.

“We	 weren’t	 sure.	 Actually,	 we	 weren’t	 even	 really	 sure	 that	 the	 creatures existed	until	I	saw	them	chasing	you	that	day.	It	was	only	a	theory	up	to	then.”

“Do	you	guys	have	any	idea	what	they	are	or	where	they	came	from?”	Dillon

asked	in	desperation,	trying	to	get	some	answers.

“We	 don’t	 know.	 Something	 bad	 is	 going	 on	 here	 and	 those	 who	 try	 to uncover	it	tend	to	go	missing,”	replied	Derek.	“That’s	why	we	need	to	take	these people	 down	 as	 soon	 as	 we	 can.	 Unfortunately,	 they	 are	 really	 cunning	 in preventing	us	from	going	after	them.	We	suspect	they	are	getting	some	outside

help,	but	don’t	know	who	that	is.	Are	you	still	up	for	helping	us?”	Derek	asked.

Now	Dillon	was	the	one	who	paused.	He	knew	that	he	was	already	in	over

his	 head	 and	 that	 his	 family	 were	 supposed	 to	 be	 here	 for	 another	 week	 and	 a half,	 which	 is	 a	 long	 time	 to	 be	 constantly	 looking	 over	 your	 shoulder	 for	 the next	attack.

“I’m	 in,”	 he	 heard	 himself	 say.	 He	 almost	 couldn’t	 believe	 that	 he	 was signing	up	for	something	that	could	potentially	kill	him.	But	what	choice	did	he have?	None.	And	he	knew	it.

“But	I	have	to	be	honest	with	you	Derek,”	he	continued,	“I’m	getting	scared

as	someone	tried	to	take	me	out	in	the	haunted	house	at	the	amusement	park	with

another	creature,	and	I	know	my	room	was	searched.	I	suspect	they	were	looking

for	the	watch	and	arrow	head.”

“Did	they	find	it?”	Derek	blurted.

“No.	 Thankfully	 I	 hid	 them	 after	 I	 got	 back	 from	 the	 amusement	 park,”	 he said.	He	could	hear	Derek	relax	a	little	on	the	other	end.

“Okay	good,”	Derek	replied.	“See,	you	are	getting	good	at	this.”

“Getting	good	at	this?”	Dillon	asked	exasperatedly.	“I	don’t	even	know	what

this	is!”

“It’s	okay	Dillon,”	Derek	reassured.	“I’ll	be	there	with	you	through	the	rest

of	this.	The	next	thing	we	need	to	do	is	that	you	have	to	get	to	town	tomorrow

morning	by	10:00.	Meet	me	at	1587	Palm	Tree	Crescent,	which	was	John’s	place

while	he	was	here.	And	don’t	forget	to	bring	the	watch	and	arrowhead.”

“How	am	I	supposed	to	do	that?”

“You’re	a	smart	kid,”	Derek	replied.	“I	know	you’ll	figure	it	out.	And	don’t

worry	about	anyone	getting	into	your	room	tonight.	My	friends	and	I	will	make

sure	that	you	have	a	good	night	sleep.	Remember:	John	is	counting	on	you.	That

is,	if	he’s	still	alive.”

“Wait	what?”	Dillon	said,	but	there	was	no	reply.	Derek	had	hung	up	already.

“Great!”	Dillon	said	as	he	hung	up	the	phone,	his	thoughts	astir.	“Just	get	to

town,	 Dillon.	 You’ll	 figure	 it	 out,	 Dillon.	 Help	 us	 save	 John,	 Dillon!”	 he	 said sarcastically.	“Does	anyone	realize	that	I’m	only	twelve!”





17

J O H N ’ S 	 H O U S E

Dillon	headed	back	to	the	pool	after	he	got	off	the	phone	with	Derek.

As	 he	 went	 he	 was	 racking	 his	 brain	 as	 to	 how	 he	 was	 going	 to

convince	Mom	and	Dad	to	let	him	go	to	town.	Sure,	he	had	gone	to

the	information	center	the	other	day	by	himself,	but	his	parents	didn’t	know	that as	they	thought	he	was	hanging	out	at	the	pool	with	Jordan.	On	that	occasion	he

also	knew	that	they	were	going	to	be	gone	longer	than	he	was,	so	it	was	easy	for him	to	just	go.	This	was	different.	As	far	as	he	knew,	his	parents	were	planning on	 staying	 around	 the	 resort	 and	 just	 chilling.	 He	 figured	 the	 chances	 of	 him slipping	away	without	them	noticing	was	pretty	well	nil.

He	also	didn’t	want	his	parents	tagging	along	as	he	needed	to	make	sure	that

he	was	able	to	get	away	and	head	to	1587	Palm	Tree	Crescent	to	meet	up	with

Derek.	 He	 knew	 he	 should	 be	 leery	 about	 going	 along	 with	 a	 stranger.	 His parents	 always	 spoke	 to	 the	 kids	 about	 the	 danger	 they	 could	 get	 into	 if	 they were	 too	 trusting	 of	 strangers,	 but	 he	 just	 had	 a	 feeling	 he	 could	 trust	 Derek.

Besides,	with	all	the	weird	stuff	that	had	happened	to	him	up	to	this	point,	and his	life	being	in	jeopardy,	he	had	no	reason	to	believe	that	Derek	wasn’t	telling the	truth	about	Orion.	In	reality,	he	had	no	choice	but	to	trust	Derek.

As	he	approached	he	decided	that	the	direct	approach	would	probably	be	the

best.

“Hey	Mom,	Dad,”	Dillon	said	as	he	walked	up.	“I	don’t	suppose	I	would	be

able	to	take	the	bus	to	town	tomorrow?	There’s	a	couple	of	things	I	would	like	to

check	out.”

“I	don’t	know	man,”	replied	Dad.	“I	was	looking	forward	to	just	hanging	out

here	tomorrow.”

“You	 don’t	 have	 to	 come,”	 Dillon	 was	 quick	 to	 respond.	 “I	 can	 take	 it	 by myself.	I	have	a	phone	just	in	case	I	need	to	get	a	hold	of	you	guys.”

“Sorry,	but	I’m	not	comfortable	with	you	going	by	yourself,”	said	Dad.

“Don’t	 look	 at	 me	 little	 bro,”	 Jordan	 added	 as	 he	 closed	 his	 eyes	 while reclining	back	in	his	deck	chair.

“What	about	Claire?”	asked	Dillon	desperately.

Claire,	who	was	sitting	next	to	Jordan	scoffed.

Dillon	could	feel	his	chances	of	getting	to	town	slip	through	his	grasp.	“Are

you	sure	you	don’t	want	to	come	Claire?”	Dillon	asked,	a	plan	starting	to	hatch

in	his	mind.

“I’m	not	really	up	for	it	Dillon,”	she	said.

“But	 I’m	 sure	 I	 saw	 a	 Jeff’s	 brand-name	 shirt	 store,”	 he	 said,	 stressing	 the

“Jeff” 	part	of	the	name.	“Or	maybe	it	was	 Jeff’s	new	and	used	emporium.	I	can’t quite	remember.	No.	I	know,	it	was	 Jeff’s	Tall	Dark	Clothing	Outlet.”

Claire	 almost	 fell	 over!	 Dillon	 knew	 that	 Claire	 had	 now	 realized	 that	 he knew	about	her	boyfriend	at	home,	Jeff	Stalman.	Mom	and	Dad	specifically	told

all	the	kids	that	they	were	not	to	date	until	they	were	at	least	sixteen,	but	when Claire	 met	 Jeff	 Dillon	 figured	 she	 threw	 that	 mandate	 out	 faster	 than	 a	 ninety five	mile	an	hour	fast	ball!	And	now	he	was	using	that	fact	against	her!	Dillon

would	pull	that	card	if	he	needed	to.

“Okay,	okay,”	she	blurted.	“I	would	love	to	take	you,”	she	said	with	gritted

teeth.

“Great!”	 Dillon	 beamed.	 “We	 need	 to	 leave	 at	 nine.	 Is	 that	 okay	 with	 you guys,”	he	said	as	he	turned	back	to	Mom	and	Dad.

They	both	looked	at	each	other	for	a	moment	then	nodded	their	approval.

Claire	glared	at	him.

Dillon	stretched	and	yawned.	“Man	it’s	getting	late.	I’m	going	to	turn	in	for

the	night.	See	you	in	the	morning	Claire,”	he	said	as	he	collected	the	rest	of	his things	and	headed	for	the	Lobby.	“You	might	want	to	consider	going	to	bed	too.



We	have	an	early	day	tomorrow,”	he	smiled	at	her.

If	her	eyes	were	daggers	then	Dillon	would	have	died	a	thousand	times	over.

DILLON	 LOOKED	 AROUND	 THE	 LOBBY	 TRYING	 TO	 APPEAR	 CASUAL	 AS	 HE	 WAITED

for	Claire	to	show	up.	It	was	only	five	minutes	past	nine	which	was	not	unusual

for	his	sister,	especially	due	to	the	fact	that	she	was	probably	still	angry	at	him for	coercing	her	into	helping	him	get	to	town.	Knowing	her,	she	would	probably

stretch	it	out	to	the	last	minute.	Dillon	wasn’t	too	worried	yet	as	the	first	shuttle bus	didn’t	leave	for	town	until	about	twenty	passed	nine.	He	still	had	time.

As	Dillon	waited,	his	thoughts	kept	going	to	the	meaning	of	the	symbol	on

the	wall.	Perhaps	maybe	the	only	person	who	might	be	able	to	help	him	with	this

knowledge	was	Tom	Tom,	and	Dillon	didn’t	even	know	if	he	was	still	alive.	He

thought	 about	 asking	 another	 tribe	 member—maybe	 the	 woman	 from	 the	 bike shop—but	he	really	didn’t	know	who	he	could	trust	and	didn’t	want	to	risk	it.

A	 moment	 later	 Claire	 surprised	 him	 by	 shambling	 out	 of	 the	 elevator	 and into	 the	 lobby.	 She	 had	 a	 whole	 eight	 minutes	 to	 spare!	 This	 was

uncharacteristically	like	her.	As	she	approached	Dillon	he	could	tell	that	she	was still	 mad	 at	 the	 way	 he	 was	 able	 to	 get	 her	 to	 “volunteer”	 to	 go	 with	 him	 into town.

“Good	morning	Claire,”	Dillon	said	in	an	innocent	tone,	trying	to	appear	as

meek	as	possible.

“Morning,”	 she	 grunted.	 The	 look	 on	 her	 face	 further	 confirmed	 that	 she wasn’t	just	mad,	but	potentially	infuriated	with	her	little	brother.

Dillon	 didn’t	 know	 what	 to	 say	 as	 they	 both	 walked	 outside	 to	 the	 front	 of the	resort	in	order	to	wait	for	the	shuttle.	The	silence	was	deafening!

They	 got	 to	 the	 bus	 stop	 and	 stood	 there,	 neither	 saying	 a	 word.	 Dillon looked	around,	pretending	to	be	interested	in	some	birds	that	perched	on	a	pole

nearby.	 Claire	 looked	 down	 at	 her	 phone,	 tapping	 away	 at	 one	 of	 her	 games.

Dillon	cleared	his	throat	a	couple	of	times	seeing	if	she	would	look	up	from	her game.	No	response.	The	tension	was	so	thick	that	you	could	cut	it	with	a	knife!

After	a	moment	Claire	finally	turned	to	Dillon	and	spouted	angrily,	“How	do	you know	about	Jeff?”

Dillon	 wasn’t	 really	 surprised	 by	 the	 question	 as	 Claire	 had	 gone	 to	 great lengths	to	keep	her	taboo	relationship	a	secret.	“I	overheard	you	talking	to	one	of your	friends	about	it	when	I	was	passing	by	your	room,”	he	responded.	“I	also

saw	you	and	Jeff	hanging	out	in	the	park	after	school	a	few	times	on	my	walk

home.”

“Ya	but	that	doesn’t	mean	anything,”	Claire	snapped.	“Lot’s	of	girls	and	guys

hang	out!”

“Yes	but	normally	the	guys	don’t	give	the	girls	a	flower	like	I	witnessed	just

before	spring	break	of	last	year,”	Dillon	said	with	a	wry	smile.	“Not	to	mention the	notes	you	have	neatly	tucked	into	your	binder,	or	the	kiss	you	gave	him	after school.	Do	you	want	me	to	continue?”

Claire	fumed!	“How	do	you	know	about	the	notes?”	she	demanded.

“One	of	them	fell	out	of	your	binder	once	and	I	found	it.”	He	paused.	“And	it

was	a	good	thing	that	I	found	it	and	not	Mom	and	Dad,”	he	asserted.	“Anyway,	I

didn’t	 know	 what	 it	 was	 until	 I	 opened	 it	 and	 found	 that	 Jeff	 was	 swearing	 his undying	love	to	you.”

Claire’s	face	went	beet	red	at	that	last	remark.

“So	after	discovering	what	it	was	I	thought	that	the	decent	thing	to	do	would

be	 to	 put	 it	 back	 when	 you	 weren’t	 looking	 and	 pretend	 that	 nothing	 ever happened.”

She	relaxed	a	little	at	Dillon’s	display	of	discretion.

“Come	 on	 Claire,”	 Dillon	 continued.	 “I	 didn’t	 want	 you	 to	 get	 in	 trouble.

That’s	why	I	didn’t	say	anything	before.”

“But	what	about	now?”	Claire	asked,	her	anger	starting	to	rise	again	with	the

thought	of	Dillon’s	play	on	her	that	got	her	stuck	going	with	him	to	town.

“Sorry	 about	 that,”	 Dillon	 replied.	 “But	 I	 really	 need	 to	 get	 to	 town	 and	 I knew	 that	 Mom	 and	 Dad	 wouldn’t	 let	 me	 go	 without	 someone	 else	 coming—

someone	older—and	you	seemed	like	the	best	choice.”

“Why	 do	 you	 need	 to	 go	 there	 so	 badly?”	 asked	 his	 sister,	 her	 curiosity starting	to	peak.



“Oh	…	it’s	nothing	important,”	Dillon	replied,	trying	hard	to	think	of	a	good

reason	that	would	allow	them	to	split	up.	“It’s	just	some	boring	stuff	that	I	read in	one	of	my	books	that	I	want	to	check	out.”	He	pulled	his	backpack	up	onto	his shoulder	 a	 little	 more	 as	 he	 saw	 the	 shuttle	 bus	 approaching	 the	 stop.	 “How about	you	head	to	the	mall	and	I’ll	meet	you	there	after?”

“Oh	no.	You	conned	me	into	going	with	you	to	keep	an	eye	on	you	and	that’s

just	what	I’m	going	to	do!	Mom	and	Dad	expect	us	to	stay	together,	remember?”

Claire	replied	angrily.

Dillon	 took	 a	 step	 back.	 “You	 won’t	 have	 fun	 where	 I’m	 going,”	 he	 shot back.

“Does	it	matter?	I	didn’t	even	want	to	come	in	the	first	place!”

Dillon	 was	 dumbfounded.	 He	 didn’t	 see	 this	 coming.	 And	 he	 knew	 he

couldn’t	take	Claire	with	him.	He	needed	to	think	of	something	fast.

“Wouldn’t	you	have	more	fun	at	the	mall?”

“Maybe.	But	it	wouldn’t	be	as	much	fun	as	making	your	life	miserable	for	a

couple	of	hours,”	she	replied	with	a	wicked	grin.

“Fine.	How	about	I	give	you	my	weeks	worth	of	allowance?”

Claire	stared	at	him.	“And	…	you	…	can	use	ten	of	my	minutes	to	call	Jeff

when	we	get	back,”	he	said	desperately.

Claire	 was	 silent.	 “Okay.	 That	 sounds	 reasonable,”	 she	 smiled	 as	 the	 bus pulled	up.

Dillon	shook	his	head	in	disbelief	as	he	walked	onto	the	bus	behind	his	sister.

He	was	thankful	that	it	wasn’t	Jordan	he	had	to	bribe	as	he	was	sure	his	brother would	 have	 been	 a	 little	 more	 suspicious	 about	 why	 he	 wanted	 to	 be	 alone.

Fortunately,	Claire	wasn’t	as	deep	of	a	thinker	as	he	was.

DILLON,	 USING	 THE	 MAPS	 APP	 ON	 HIS	 PHONE,	 HAD	 NO	 PROBLEM	 FINDING	 1587

Palm	Tree	Crescent.	It	was	about	a	fifteen	minute	walk	from	where	the	bus	had

dropped	him	and	Claire	off,	and	he	planned	it	just	about	right	with	the	pick	up

and	drop	off	schedule	for	the	bus	when	he	looked	at	it	the	night	before.	In	reality,

the	 residential	 area	 of	 the	 Oasis	 Resort	 wasn’t	 really	 that	 big.	 It	 was	 mainly reserved	for	members	of	the	tribe	with	a	few	really	nice	condos	and	houses	for

people	 like	 Janeen	 and	 that	 Aussie	 bellman	 from	 the	 hotel	 who	 came	 there	 to work.

The	most	striking	thing	about	the	residential	area	was	how	clean	it	was!	All

the	lawns	were	cut	neatly,	the	hedges	trimmed,	and	the	flowers	that	grew	there

looked	well	taken	care	of.	It	didn’t	look	as	though	there	was	even	any	wear-and-

tear	on	the	streets,	sidewalks,	fences,	or	signs!	Dillon	thought	that	it	seemed	kind of	 creepy.	 The	 only	 thing	 that	 made	 it	 halfway	 normal	 was	 the	 fact	 that	 there were	 kids	 out	 playing,	 moms	 strolling	 along	 the	 sidewalks	 with	 their	 baby strollers	and	little	ones	in	tow,	and	a	few	others	out	walking	their	dogs.	That	kind of	 activity	 put	 Dillon	 at	 ease	 as	 it	 reminded	 him	 of	 the	 street	 that	 he	 lived	 on back	home.

“In	one	hundred	feet	take	the	next	right	onto	Palm	Tree	Crescent,”	said	the

melodic	 woman’s	 voice	 of	 the	 GPS,	 which	 brought	 Dillon’s	 thoughts	 back	 to why	 he	 had	 come	 all	 this	 way.	 He	 immediately	 stopped	 gazing	 around	 and focused	his	attention	to	where	he	was	going.

When	he	made	it	to	Palm	Tree	Crescent	the	GPS	sounded	again.	“Turn	right

onto	Palm	Tree	Crescent,”	she	said.	“Your	destination	is	fifty	feet	on	your	left.”

Dillon	double	tapped	his	phone	and	swiped	up	to	get	rid	of	the	mapping.

As	he	approached	the	house	he	noticed	a	man	sitting	in	a	car	across	from	the

address.	 He	 immediately	 recognized	 it	 as	 Derek.	 Derek,	 as	 soon	 as	 he	 saw	 the boy,	got	out	of	the	car	and	came	over	to	him.	He	smiled	and	nodded	as	he	did.

“Good	to	see	you	could	make	it.	I	knew	you	wouldn’t	disappoint.”

“Look,	I	can	help,	but	I’ve	got	to	leave	here	by	10:45	at	the	latest.	The	next

bus	comes	at	11:15	and	I	promised	my	parents	we’d	be	back	on	that	bus.”

Derek	 laughed	 and	 put	 his	 hands	 up,	 motioning	 for	 Dillon	 to	 slow	 down.

“Don’t	worry	kid,	we’ll	be	out	of	here	in	no	time.”

Dillon	breathed	easier	and	nodded.	“So,	this	is	the	place,”	he	said,	trying	to

contain	his	nervousness	which	he	knew	he	was	doing	a	terrible	job	at.

“Yep.	 The	 last	 residence	 of	 John	 Taylor	 Sebastian,”	 Derek	 replied	 soberly.

He	then	looked	to	Dillon	again.	“You	did	bring	the	watch	and	arrow	head,	didn’t

you?”

“Of	course	I	did,”	Dillon	said,	reaching	into	his	pocket.	He	was	about	to	pull

them	out,	but	Derek	stopped	him.

“Not	here,”	he	whispered.	“Let’s	wait	till	we’re	inside.

Dillon	nodded	and	zipped	the	bag	back	up.

They	 both	 approached	 the	 front	 door.	 “Does	 someone	 else	 live	 here	 now?”

asked	Dillon.

“Actually	 someone	 does.	 But	 the	 friends	 I	 work	 with	 have	 made	 sure	 that they	won’t	be	back	for	at	least	two	hours.”

The	way	Derek	talked	about	 his	friends	sent	a	chill	down	Dillon’s	back.	He wasn’t	sure	why	as	Derek	didn’t	say	it	in	a	cryptic	manner	or	by	using	a	Batman

voice,	but	the	mention	of	others	from	a	secret	organization	that	he	didn’t	really know	anything	about	was	kind	of	creepy.	Dillon	shook	the	thoughts	away	as	he

knew	that	the	questions	he	had	for	Derek	about	the	people	he	worked	for	would

have	to	wait	for	another	time.

Derek	 turned	 the	 door	 handle,	 but	 the	 door	 appeared	 to	 be	 locked.	 He	 then reached	 in	 his	 pocket	 and	 produced	 a	 small	 square	 black	 device.	 He	 pushed	 a button	 on	 the	 device	 and	 a	 small	 flat	 rod	 snapped	 out	 of	 the	 end	 of	 it.	 Derek forced	 the	 rod	 into	 the	 door	 lock,	 jiggled	 it	 around	 a	 little,	 and	 then	 pushed another	 button.	 Dillon	 heard	 the	 distinctive	 sound	 of	 the	 locking	 mechanism moving	and	then	the	“click”	as	it	finished	its	revolution.	Derek	looked	down	at

Dillon	 and	 smiled.	 “Standard	 issue,”	 he	 said	 with	 a	 light	 chuckle	 as	 he	 opened the	door.

Now	Dillon	really	did	want	to	meet	the	people	that	Derek	worked	for	if	only

to	get	his	hands	on	one	of	those	awesome	devices!

Derek	 entered	 the	 hallway	 and	 motioned	 for	 Dillon	 to	 do	 the	 same.	 When they	were	both	in	the	house	Derek	shut	and	locked	the	door	again.	He	turned	to

Dillon.	“Okay,	now	you	can	pull	out	the	watch	and	the	arrow	head.”

Dillon	 took	 the	 two	 items	 out.	 “I’m	 not	 sure	 what	 you	 want	 me	 to	 do	 with these,”	he	said.

“I	don’t	know	either,”	replied	Derek.	“But	those	items	were	mailed	directly

to	us	by	John	just	before	he	went	missing	so	I	have	to	assume	they	are	incredibly

important	 in	 finding	 out	 what	 happened	 to	 him.	 I’m	 trusting	 you	 to	 be	 able	 to figure	out	what	they’re	for.”

Dillon	swallowed	hard	as	he	began	to	feel	the	gravity	of	the	situation	come

down	on	him.	“Okay,”	he	said	at	length,	“but	you	need	to	give	me	a	moment	to

think	about	this.”

“Sure.	No	problem.	But	let’s	think	about	it	somewhere	else	in	this	house.”

“Okay.	Where?”	asked	Dillon.

“I’m	 thinking	 we	 start	 in	 the	 room	 he	 used	 as	 a	 study	 while	 he	 was	 here,”

Derek	replied.

“Okay.	Where	is	that?”

“Follow	me,”	said	Derek	as	he	started	to	move	through	the	house.

The	two	trespassers	went	down	the	hallway,	through	another	room,	and	to	a

set	 of	 stairs.	 Derek	 took	 them	 up	 the	 stairs	 and	 to	 the	 room	 that	 was	 directly across	 at	 the	 top.	 Dillon	 was	 amazed	 at	 how	 large	 this	 house	 seemed.	 It	 didn’t look	nearly	this	big	from	the	outside.

The	room	they	entered	appeared	to	be	a	kid’s	room	now.	It	had	a	single	bed,

a	 small	 dresser	 that	 was	 decorated	 like	 Lightning	 McQueen,	 and	 tons	 of	 toys scattered	throughout.

“This	 was	 his	 study?”	 Dillon	 asked,	 not	 even	 trying	 slightly	 to	 hide	 his sarcastic	tone.

Derek	nodded	as	he	began	to	move	around	the	room	as	though	he	was	trying

to	remember	the	layout	from	when	John	was	the	renter.

“Were	 you	 in	 this	 room	 before?”	 asked	 Dillon	 as	 he	 noted	 Derek’s

movements.

“Not	exactly,”	he	replied,	still	moving	around	as	though	he	was	picturing	a

desk	here,	and	some	chairs	there.	“I	Skyped	with	him	a	number	of	times	while

he	 was	 performing	 his	 work	 here,”	 he	 said,	 glancing	 back	 at	 Dillon	 who	 was now	looking	more	intensely	at	the	watch.

Dillon	opened	up	the	watch	and	looked	to	where	the	hands	should	have	been.

It	was	weird	that	the	hands	were	missing.	He	just	assumed	that	it	was	incredibly old	and	they	got	damaged	somehow	and	were	beyond	repair.

“Did	this	thing	work	when	you	had	it?”	Dillon	asked.	“I	mean,	do	you	know

what	happened	to	the	hands?”

“No,”	replied	Derek	with	a	curious	tone	to	his	voice.	“I	always	just	assumed

that	it	got	damaged	before	it	got	to	us.”

Dillon	 looked	 more	 closely,	 then	 grabbed	 his	 pocket	 knife	 out,	 flipped	 it open,	 and	 started	 trying	 to	 pry	 the	 glass	 off.	 Surprisingly	 it	 came	 up	 without much	effort.

“That	was	way	too	easy,”	Dillon	said	as	he	looked	to	Derek.

“Well	we	know	it	was	opened	at	least	once	when	the	hands	were	taken	out,”

Derek	postulated,	coming	closer	to	see	Dillon	at	work	with	the	watch.	“But	why

would	John	do	that?”

“I	 don’t	 know.	 Unless	 …	 ”	 Dillon	 took	 the	 arrowhead	 he	 had	 found	 and started	examining	it.	“Here!	Look,”	he	said	excitedly	to	Derek	as	he	pointed	to

something	on	one	side	of	it.

“It	looks	like	a	small	hole,”	Derek	said,	not	quite	catching	on.

Dillon	nodded	as	he	took	the	arrowhead	and	placed	it	into	the	watch	where

the	 hands	 were	 supposed	 to	 go.	 It	 fit	 perfectly!	 As	 soon	 as	 he	 connected	 the arrowhead	with	the	watch	pin	it	started	to	spin.	Dillon	began	moving	around	the

room	 holding	 out	 the	 watch	 and	 seeing	 what	 the	 arrowhead	 would	 do.	 It	 spun around	 a	 little	 and	 then	 started	 to	 aim	 to	 the	 right.	 He	 walked	 that	 way,	 then	 it started	to	aim	to	the	left	a	little.	Every	time	Dillon	moved	the	way	the	watch	was pointing	it	would	readjust	a	little	until	it	finally	stayed	pointing	at	the	wall	where the	kid’s	dresser	was.

Derek	 quickly	 moved	 the	 dresser	 out	 of	 the	 way.	 There	 didn’t	 seem	 to	 be anything	 out	 of	 the	 ordinary	 with	 this	 part	 of	 the	 wall,	 but	 the	 arrowhead	 was definitely	pointing	at	it,	and	Dillon	figured	there	had	to	be	a	reason.	He	moved closer	to	the	wall	and	inspected	it.	Everything	seemed	to	be	normal.	He	ran	his

hand	along	it	and	didn’t	notice	anything	out	of	the	ordinary.

“I	 don’t	 know	 what	 to	 make	 of	 it,”	 he	 said,	 seeming	 a	 little	 confused.

“Maybe	we	just	need	to	cut	into	it	to	see	what’s	there.”

Derek	didn’t	like	that	prospect.	“I	don’t	think	we	can	do	that,”	he	told	Dillon

seriously.	 “Keep	 looking	 and	 I’ll	 search	 around	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 room	 to	 see	 if there	is	anything	else	that	can	help	us	out.”

“Did	anyone	else	from	Orion	come	here	before	us	and	search	for	any	clues that	John	might	have	left	behind?”	Dillon	asked	before	he	started	poking	around.

“Yes.	 That’s	 the	 disturbing	 part,”	 Derek	 replied.	 “We	 had	 some	 of	 our	 best people	 with	 their	 high-tech	 equipment	 come	 in	 here	 and	 they	 found	 nothing.

Some	 of	 them	 suspected	 that	 there	 was	 a	 dampening	 field	 around	 the	 resort	 as our	 surveillance	 equipment	 couldn’t	 see	 anything	 from	 either	 the	 inside	 or outside.	 The	 only	 signal	 that	 seems	 to	 get	 in	 or	 out	 are	 cell	 signals.	 That’s probably	 because	 they’re	 trying	 to	 maintain	 a	 low	 profile.	 Not	 having	 cell service	might	elicit	too	many	complaints.	The	happier	they	keep	their	guests,	the more	business	they	do,	which	means	more	profits.”

“What	about	the	more	non-subtle	tactic	of	taking	walls	apart?”	Dillon	asked.

Derek	 shook	 his	 head.	 “No.	 We	 prefer	 to	 stay	 as	 covert	 as	 possible.	 That would	have	just	drawn	too	much	attention.	We	have	to	resort	to	stealth	until	we

can	find	out	who,	or	what,	we’re	dealing	with	here.”

Derek	paused	for	a	moment	as	if	trying	to	choose	his	words	wisely.	“Orion

doesn’t	 like	 attracting	 any	 attention	 to	 itself	 if	 possible.	 It’s	 kind	 of	 a	 mandate that’s	been	laid	out.”

Dillon	 nodded,	 trying	 to	 take	 it	 all	 in,	 then	 looked	 back	 to	 the	 wall.	 As	 he did,	he	noticed,	what	looked	to	be	three	small	dots	on	the	wall.	For	some	reason he	 didn’t	 notice	 them	 when	 he	 first	 looked,	 but	 now	 they	 were	 here,	 plain	 as could	 be.	 Immediately	 his	 mind	 whirled	 back	 to	 when	 he	 first	 found	 the arrowhead.	The	pattern	of	the	dots	seemed	familiar.	He	took	the	arrowhead	off

the	 watch	 pin	 and	 looked	 at	 the	 bumps	 he	 had	 seen	 before.	 They	 appeared	 as though	they	would	be	a	perfect	match.	He	took	the	arrowhead	and	put	the	pins

into	the	holes.	There	was	a	click.

Derek	 heard	 the	 click	 a	 few	 feet	 away	 and	 rushed	 over	 to	 see	 what	 Dillon had	found.	As	he	came	over	he	saw	Dillon	push	on	the	wall.	A	section	about	one

foot	by	one	foot	depressed	into	the	wall	and	hinged	to	the	left.	It	was	a	cleverly designed	door	as	the	seams	were	so	well	hidden	that	you	couldn’t	even	tell	there was	a	door	there.

“Remind	me	to	ask	John,	when	we	find	him,	how	he	was	able	to	make	such

an	ingenious	hiding	space,”	Derek	said.

The	mention	of	finding	John	alive	gave	Dillon	hope.	It	was	nice	for	him	to hear	that	Derek	was	optimistic	about	that	prospect.	The	thought	of	this	also	gave Dillon	 a	 longing	 that	 Tom	 Tom	 might	 still	 be	 alive	 as	 well.	 This	 brought	 a seriousness	 to	 him	 that	 he	 rarely	 experienced.	 He	 knew	 he	 had	 to	 do	 what	 he could	to	help	these	men,	and	for	some	reason	Derek	believed	that	he	was	the	one

to	be	able	to	help	do	just	that.	Dillon,	on	the	other	hand,	had	huge	doubts	about this.

“Well	 …	 go	 on,”	 Derek	 prodded	 when	 he	 saw	 that	 Dillon	 had	 paused	 after opening	the	door.

Dillon	 bent	 down	 and	 looked	 inside	 the	 hole.	 The	 only	 thing	 he	 saw	 was	 a medium	 sized	 black	 backpack.	 He	 reached	 inside,	 grabbed	 hold	 of	 one	 of	 the straps,	and	was	about	to	pull	it	out	when	Derek	suddenly	cocked	his	head	toward

the	door.

“What?”	asked	Dillon	with	a	tone	of	urgency	in	his	voice.

Derek	turned	back	to	Dillon.	“We’re	not	alone,”	he	whispered	as	a	he	pulled

out	his	gun.

“What!	 You	 mean	 you	 didn’t	 have	 anyone	 on	 the	 outside	 as	 a	 lookout?”

Dillon	spouted.

“We’re	a	little	short	staffed	right	now,”	Derek	replied	in	a	loud	whisper	as	he

cocked	his	gun.





18

T H E 	 M E R C E N A R Y

“What’s	that?”	Dillon	asked,	as	loud	as	he	dared,	pointing	at

Derek’s	gun.

“Duh	…	It’s	a	gun,”	came	Derek’s	sarcastic	reply.

“I	know	it’s	a	gun!”	replied	Dillon.	“But	what’s	it	for?”

Derek	glanced	at	him	with	that, “Really	kid?” expression.

“Okay	 I	 know	 what	 it’s	 for!”	 Dillon	 whispered	 a	 little	 louder	 as	 he	 rose	 to stand	beside	Derek.	“But	is	it	really	necessary?”

“I	 don’t	 know,”	 came	 Derek’s	 sharp	 reply.	 “But	 I’d	 rather	 have	 it	 and	 not need	it	then	not	have	it	and	need	it!”

“What	if	it’s	just	the	owners	of	the	house?”

“That’s	doubtful.	I	know	for	a	fact	that	the	owners	are	still	detained,”	Derek

whispered	matter-of-factly.

They	could	hear	some	light	movement	coming	up	the	stairs.

“Well	I	really	don’t	want	to	see	anyone	get	shot	today!	Especially	not	me!”

Dillon	whispered	emphatically.

“Okay	 …	 okay	 …	 ”	 Derek	 said	 as	 he	 placed	 his	 gun	 back	 in	 its	 concealed spot	 under	 his	 shirt.	 He	 then	 bent	 down	 and	 reached	 under	 his	 pant	 leg	 and produced	a	small	combat	knife.

“What’s	that?”	Dillon	asked	again.

Derek	 just	 shook	 his	 head	 at	 him.	 “Listen	 Dillon,	 I’m	 not	 going	 into	 a possible	fight	without	some	protection.	I’ll	try	not	to	kill	anyone,	okay.”

Dillon	nodded	his	head	up	and	down	so	fast	that	he	looked	like	one	of	those bobble	heads	people	have	on	their	dashboards.

“Quick!	We	only	have	a	second,”	Derek	said	as	he	darted	to	the	side	of	the

door.

“What	do	you	want	me	to	do?”

“Just	stay	there,”	Derek	replied.

“What?	And	be	used	as	bait?”

Derek	shrugged	his	shoulders.

“And	what	if	he	has	a	gun	and	shoots	at	me	before	you	have	a	chance	to	take

him	down?”

“Then	run	and	try	not	to	get	shot!”	Derek’s	reply	was	less	than	comforting.

“I’m	only	twelve	remember!	I’m	too	young	to	die!”

Derek	put	a	finger	to	his	mouth,	telling	Dillon	to	be	quiet.

Dillon	could	feel	his	heart	pound	in	his	chest.	He	was	sure	that	it	was	going

to	explode	at	any	moment.	It	sounded	as	though	the	person	who	was	coming	up

the	stairs	was	trying	to	be	as	quiet	as	they	could	but	were	failing	due	to	the	aged stair	 boards	 that	 creaked	 ever	 so	 slightly	 with	 any	 amount	 of	 pressure.

Eventually	Dillon	saw	a	tall	figure	emerge	from	the	stairway.	He	was	wearing	a

dark	balaclava,	had	kaki	shorts	on	and	a	Hawaiian	short	sleeved	shirt.	It	looked ridiculous,	 but	 Dillon	 didn’t	 laugh	 as	 he	 noticed	 immediately	 that	 the	 man	 was carrying	a	gun.

Dillon	made	eye	contact	with	him	which	was	enough	to	trigger	his	fight	or

flight	response.	“Nope,”	he	said	as	he	ran	to	the	side	and	dived	behind	the	bed.

He	could	hear	the	man	move	up	the	rest	of	the	stairs	quickly	and	head	for	the

room.	 As	 soon	 as	 he	 entered	 the	 room	 Derek	 charged	 into	 him,	 sending	 the attacker	 flying	 into	 the	 wall.	 The	 man	 managed	 to	 stay	 on	 his	 feet.	 He	 spun	 to meet	Derek,	gun	leading.	Derek	managed	to	sidestep	and	knock	the	gun	out	wide

as	a	shot	went	off.

Dillon	flinched	when	the	shot	fired.	He	saw	the	two	men	entangled,	fighting

for	their	lives.

Derek	spun	his	knife	around	and	sliced	the	attacker	on	the	arm	that	held	the

gun.	The	attacker	grunted	in	pain	but	stubbornly	hung	on	to	his	weapon.	He	tried

to	get	another	shot	off,	but	Derek	pushed	his	arm	out	wide	again.	The	bullet	sank into	the	wall	beside	Dillon’s	head.

Derek	grabbed	the	gun	arm	with	his	empty	hand	and	held	it	up	high	as	the

attacker	 struggled	 to	 get	 free.	 He	 sliced	 down	 on	 his	 arm	 again.	 This	 time	 the gun	came	loose	and	dropped	to	the	ground	as	drops	of	blood	poured	down	onto

the	floor.	Derek	was	forced	to	let	go	at	that	point	as	the	man	punched	him	three times	in	the	ribs.	He	quickly	put	some	distance	between	him	and	the	attacker	as

each	sized	the	other	up.

From	 behind	 his	 back	 the	 attacker	 pulled	 a	 knife	 about	 the	 same	 size	 as Derek’s.	Derek	smiled.	The	man	came	forward.	As	fast	as	lightning	Derek	pulled

his	 gun	 from	 behind	 his	 back	 and	 shot	 the	 attacker	 in	 the	 leg.	 The	 man	 went down	in	agony.	As	he	crumpled,	Derek	gave	him	a	clean	roundhouse	to	the	head

which	laid	him	out	flat.

“See!”	 Derek	 exclaimed	 as	 he	 looked	 at	 Dillon	 who	 was	 now	 coming	 out from	behind	the	bed.	“Bang	…	down.	That’s	how	it	works	with	guns!”

Dillon	bobbed	his	head	up	and	down	quickly	like	the	bobblehead	dolls	again.

“Now	let’s	see	who	this	guy	is,”	said	Derek	as	he	crouched	down	and	pulled

the	mask	from	his	face.	The	man	had	a	shock	of	thick	wild	blonde	hair.

“I	 know	 this	 guy,”	 Dillon	 said	 in	 surprise.	 “Well	 …	 I	 don’t	 know	 him	 …	 I mean	I’ve	seen	him	around	at	the	resort.”

Derek	 looked	 at	 Dillon	 skeptically.	 “You’ve	 seen	 this	 guy?”	 he	 asked.

“There’s	 only	 roughly	 five	 thousand	 people	 at	 the	 resort,	 not	 including	 the resident	 population	 who	 come	 in	 from	 time	 to	 time	 to	 use	 the	 pool	 or	 have dinner	in	the	restaurant,	and	you	remember	seeing	this	guy?”

“Hey	man.	You’re	the	one	who	says	I	have	gifts	of	observation.	Besides,	who

could	forget	crazy	hair	like	that!”

Derek	conceded	the	point.

“And	yes	…	I	have	seen	this	guy	mingling	around	the	pool	when	my	family

was	there.	Maybe	he’s	the	one	who	ransacked	my	room?”

“Could	 be,”	 replied	 Derek.	 “But	 for	 now	 …	 ”	 His	 voice	 trailed	 off	 as	 he pulled	out	his	phone	and	took	a	picture	of	the	guy.	“Let’s	see	if	we	know	him.”

Dillon	 watched	 as	 Derek’s	 phone	 flipped	 through	 a	 bunch	 of	 pictures	 and

then	 stopped	 on	 this	 guy.	 “He	 is	 known	 by	 The	 Orion	 Group,”	 Derek	 stated.

“He’s	a	hired	gun.	A	mercenary.”

“A	mercenary?”	Dillon	asked.

“Yes	Dillon.	A	mercenary	that	is	obviously	after	you.	And	…”	Derek	began

to	 say	 but	 then	 trailed	 off	 as	 he	 read	 more	 of	 the	 data	 about	 this	 guy	 on	 his phone.

“And	what?”

“Never	mind	it’s	not	important,”	Derek	replied	as	he	put	his	phone	away.

Dillon	swallowed	hard.	“This	guy	must	have	known	you	were	here	with	me,”

Dillon	 finally	 said	 at	 length.	 “How	 else	 would	 he	 have	 known	 we	 were	 here except	if	he	followed	me?	He	would	have	then	seen	you	and	I	entering	together.”

“And	your	point	is?”	Derek	asked.

“If	 he’s	 some	 expert	 then	 why	 did	 he	 barge	 in	 here	 like	 a	 deer	 in	 mating season	and	get	caught	off-guard?”

“Interesting	analogy	Dillon.	Do	you	hunt	much?”

“I	saw	a	documentary	one	time,”	he	replied.

Derek	rolled	his	eyes.	“The	one	thing	you	have	to	learn	from	this	is	that	not

every	 ‘expert'	 is	 smart,	 or	 much	 of	 an	 expert,”	 Derek	 replied	 with	 a	 chuckle.

“Besides,	you	made	the	difference	by	running	and	diving	behind	the	bed	at	the

right	 moment.	 Your	 sudden	 movement	 sparked	 the	 chase	 instinct	 in	 him	 which momentarily	blocked	his	logic	centers.	At	that	moment,	for	a	split	second,	all	he wanted	to	do	was	to	get	you	and	dismissed	any	thought	of	me.	That	second	was

all	I	needed.”

“So	 what	 you’re	 saying	 is	 that	 my	 running	 away	 like	 a	 scared	 little	 rabbit saved	the	day?”	Dillon	sounded	confused.

“Another	documentary?”	Derek	asked	dryly.	“Now	come	on.	Let’s	finish	up

here	 with	 John’s	 stuff.	 I’ll	 text	 a	 friend	 of	 mine	 to	 come	 and	 clean	 this	 up,”

Derek	stated	rather	coldly.

“I	thought	you	were	short	staffed?”

“Short	 staffed	 on	 field	 agents,”	 Derek	 explained.	 “Never	 mind,”	 he	 waved his	hand	dismissively.

Dillon	 swallowed	 hard. What	 have	 I	 gotten	 myself	 into? he	 thought	 to

himself.	“Is	this	guy	dead?”	he	asked.

“No.	 Just	 knocked	 out	 and	 bleeding	 a	 little.	 My	 friend	 will	 take	 him	 away and	see	to	him.”

At	this	point	Dillon	thought	that	it	was	best	not	to	ask	anymore	questions	and

instead	 he	 went	 back	 over	 to	 the	 hole	 in	 the	 wall	 and	 retrieved	 the	 backpack.

Inside	 he	 found	 what	 appeared	 to	 be	 regular	 looking	 hiking	 gear:	 flashlight, lighter,	 large	 knife,	 hatchet,	 rope,	 and	 …	 a	 torch.	 Dillon	 thought	 that	 the	 torch was	 an	 odd	 addition	 to	 the	 gear,	 but	 then	 he	 remembered	 in	 his	 dream	 that	 he was	 carrying	 a	 torch.	 Even	 when	 he	 first	 dreamed	 about	 it	 he	 thought	 it	 was weird.	 Who	 uses	 torches	 in	 this	 day	 and	 age?	 But	 he	 just	 had	 this	 feeling	 that there	 was	 something	 important	 about	 it.	 The	 other	 weird	 thing	 he	 found	 was	 a large	 stone	 in	 the	 top	 pocket	 of	 the	 back	 pack.	 He	 looked	 at	 it	 closely	 as	 it appeared	more	metallic	than	stone.	As	he	turned	it	over	he	got	an	idea.	He	pulled the	hidden	door	shut	by	the	arrowhead.	As	soon	as	it	clicked	shut	the	arrowhead

came	off	the	wall.	Once	the	arrowhead	was	in	Dillon’s	hand	he	opened	his	palm

and	it	immediately	shot	toward	the	stone	and	fastened	itself	there.

“Ah.	A	magnet,”	Derek	stated	as	he	came	closer,	having	finished	bandaging

the	attackers	leg	and	notifying	his	friend.

“A	really	powerful	one,”	Dillon	commented.	“John’s	a	pretty	smart	guy.”

Derek	leaned	in	to	take	a	picture	of	it	with	his	phone	when	the	display	started

to	fade	in	and	out,	appearing	as	though	it	was	shorting	out.	He	pulled	his	phone away	and	it	went	back	to	normal,	but	he	noticed	that	his	battery	was	now	down

to	thirty	four	percent.

“I	 think	 this	 stone	 has	 other	 properties,”	 Derek	 said,	 shaking	 his	 head	 in disgust.	 He	 turned	 the	 phone	 so	 Dillon	 could	 see	 the	 screen.	 “I	 just	 charged	 it this	morning!	Better	keep	your	electronic	devices	clear.”

Dillon	nodded,	then	rummaged	through	the	pack	a	little	more	and	in	one	of

the	 side	 pockets	 he	 pulled	 out	 what	 appeared	 to	 be	 a	 map.	 He	 unfolded	 it	 and immediately	recognized	it	as	a	map	of	the	Oasis	Resort	and	surrounding	area.	It

went	 as	 far	 out	 as	 the	 information	 center.	 He	 noticed	 that	 there	 were	 large question	 marks	 in	 about	 six	 areas	 over	 places	 around	 the	 resort	 including	 the amusement	 park,	 Resort	 Hotel,	 various	 places	 in	 the	 residential	 area,	 and	 the



information	 center.	 All	 of	 the	 question	 marks	 had	 X’s	 through	 them	 except	 the one	at	the	Center.

“I	think	I	know	where	the	entrance	is,”	Dillon	said	as	he	looked	up	at	Derek

and	smiled.

“HEY	 SIS!”	 DILLON	 HOLLERED	 AS	 HE	 APPROACHED	 CLAIRE	 IN	 FRONT	 OF	 THE

mall.	 Shortly	 after	 he	 and	 Derek	 left	 John’s	 old	 house	 he	 called	 Claire	 and arranged	 a	 place	 to	 meet.	 Thankfully	 he	 kept	 his	 phone	 far	 enough	 away	 from the	 stone	 when	 they	 were	 at	 the	 house	 so	 that	 it	 didn’t	 lose	 too	 much	 battery power.

“How	 was	 your	 sightseeing?”	 Claire	 asked,	 appearing	 to	 be	 bored	 by

Dillon’s	pastimes.

“Oh	…	it	was	good.	I	got	to	see	where	the	first	houses	were	built,	and	the	old

library,”	 he	 said	 trying	 to	 play	 it	 up.	 “Oh	 yeah!	 And	 they	 have	 this	 cool	 fire station!”

Claire	rolled	her	eyes.	“Lame,”	she	said.	“You’re	such	a	weird	kid.”

“Maybe,	 but	 sometimes	 weird	 is	 exciting,”	 he	 said,	 wondering	 what	 she

would	have	thought	if	she	knew	the	truth	about	what	he	was	doing.

“Sure	thing.	Whatever	you	say.”

Dillon	 just	 smiled	 as	 they	 walked	 over	 to	 where	 the	 bus	 was	 going	 to	 pick them	up	again.

As	they	waited	in	silence	he	contemplated	all	the	events	that	had	happened

that	led	up	to	this	point.	He	also	went	over	in	his	head	the	next	stage	of	the	plan.

Derek	felt	that	it	was	best	if	he	took	John’s	things	in	order	to	keep	them	safe.	He did	 let	 Dillon	 keep	 the	 watch	 and	 arrowhead	 however.	 Dillon	 felt	 that	 maybe Derek	figured	he	at	least	earned	that.

The	plan	was	for	Dillon	to	sneak	out	of	his	room	at	one	in	the	morning,	meet

Derek	just	outside	the	resort	gate,	and	head	to	the	information	center.	It	sounded simple,	but	Dillon’s	stomach	was	in	knots!	He	had	almost	been	killed	three	times now,	but	hey,	who’s	counting?	He	at	least	felt	more	comfortable	that	Derek	was

with	him	in	this.	The	guy	obviously	knew	how	to	handle	himself	and	that	gave Dillon	 some	 measure	 of	 comfort.	 He	 also	 assured	 Dillon	 that	 he	 would	 make sure	his	room	was	watched	so	he	didn’t	have	any	run-ins	with	more	goons	out	to

harm	 him.	 He	 also	 guaranteed	 that	 his	 family	 was	 safe.	 That	 was	 the	 biggest comfort	of	all	for	the	young	boy	in	the	middle	of	this	crazy	ride.

He	had	mixed	feelings	about	whether	he	was	doing	the	right	thing	in	helping

out	this	Orion	Group	find	John	Taylor	Sebastian.	He	wished	he	knew	who	they

were.	 That	 thought	 nagged	 at	 him	 and	 made	 him	 feel	 uncomfortable.	 He	 was helping	a	mysterious	organization	who	apparently	operated	from	the	shadows.

As	he	thought	about	it	more	he	wondered, Am	I	doing	the	right	thing?





19

E S C A P E 	 F R O M 	 T H E 	 H O T E L

During	dinner	Claire	tried	not	to	make	too	much	eye	contact	with	Mom

and	 Dad.	 She	 didn’t	 want	 to	 be	 put	 into	 a	 difficult	 position	 about

having	to	answer	questions	about	her’s	and	Dillon’s	trip	to	town.

“So	how	was	town	today?”	Mom	asked.

There	it	was!	The	bomb	Claire	was	trying	to	avoid.

“Oh	 it	 was	 great!”	 Dillon	 jumped	 in.	 “We	 saw	 so	 many	 great	 sights	 and Claire	was	really	good	about	it.”	Claire	looked	up	at	him	and	he	smiled	back	at

her	as	if	to	say, “I’ve	got	this.” 	She	thought	for	sure	that	he	was	going	to	blow	it, as	he	was	notoriously	 not	good	at	keeping	things	from	Mom	and	Dad.

“That	sounds	good,”	replied	Dad.	“What	did	you	like	the	best?”

“I	think	the	library	was	probably	the	best	spot,	but	I’m	sure	Claire	liked	the

mall	when	we	got	back	and	had	lunch	there.”

Claire	nodded.	“Ya,	the	mall	was	definitely	the	best.”

“Well	I’m	glad	the	two	of	you	had	such	a	good	time,”	said	Dad.	“And	thank

you	Claire	for	taking	care	of	your	brother.	We	appreciate	you	doing	that	for	us, and	I’m	sure	Dillon	does	too.”

“Ya	thanks	sis!”	Dillon	said	enthusiastically.

Claire	 gave	 Dillon	 that	 look	 that	 said, “Don’t	 overdue	 it.”	 In	 truth,	 it	 did appear	to	her	that	something	was	changing	in	her	brother;	she	just	couldn’t	put

her	finger	on	it.

Jordan	stared	hard	at	his	brother	and	Claire	for	a	moment	then	resumed	his



eating.	Claire	couldn’t	help	but	feel	that	Jordan	suspected	that	something	was	up with	the	two	of	them	and	hoped	that	he	wouldn’t	say	anything	that	would	cause

Mom	 and	 Dad	 to	 start	 “probing”	 into	 their	 time	 away.	 She	 was	 beginning	 to realize	that	Jordan	wasn’t	always	your	typical	shallow	sixteen	year	old	boy	who

raved	 about	 girls,	 gamed	 all	 the	 time,	 and	 was	 more	 concerned	 about	 how	 he looked	then	about	anyone	else.

AFTER	DINNER	DILLON	WENT	 BACK	 INTO	 THE	 BUSINESS	 CENTER	 WITH	 HIS	 BOOKS.

He	 was	 really	 nervous	 about	 the	 plan	 he	 and	 Derek	 made	 to	 go	 and	 find	 the entrance	 to	 the	 underground	 caverns	 of	 the	 Oasis	 and	 he	 wanted	 to	 do	 some more	reading	to	make	sure	he	was	as	prepared	as	possible.	He	cracked	open	the

book	Tom	Tom	had	recommended	to	him	about	the	creatures	of	the	desert.	After

flipping	through	a	couple	pages	he	was	struck	with	the	creatures	he	was	seeing

in	the	book	and	the	ones	he	had	encountered	so	far	in	real	life	and	in	his	dreams.

He	 saw	 the	 coyotes,	 spiders,	 rats,	 and	 even	 snakes.	 The	 ones	 he	 had	 seen	 in person	 and	 in	 his	 dreams	 were	 obviously	 different	 as	 they	 had	 been	 changed somehow.	He	shuddered	to	think	what	other	monsters	they	might	be	creating.

“Are	you	Dillon	Hunt,”	came	a	deep	smooth	voice,	which	startled	Dillon.	He

jumped	a	little	as	he	looked	up.

There,	 standing	 in	 front	 of	 him,	 was	 an	 elderly	 native	 man	 with	 long	 grey hair	that	was	neatly	tied	back	in	a	pony	tale.	He	wore	a	collared	shirt	and	a	silk vest.	 The	 cologne	 he	 wore	 was	 warmly	 fragrant	 and	 smelled	 like	 a	 summer’s breeze.	He	smiled	warmly	as	he	looked	down	at	the	boy.

“Ah	…	ya	…	that’s	me,”	Dillon	replied,	not	really	knowing	what	to	say.

“Sorry	 to	 have	 startled	 you.	 But	 my	 name	 is	 Geoffrey	 Eagles-rock.	 I’m	 a friend	of	Janeen’s.”

Dillon	was	frozen.	He	didn’t	know	what	to	say	or	do.	Geoffrey	didn’t	say	a

word,	 but	 let	 the	 awkward	 silence	 persist.	 Dillon	 had	 a	 feeling	 that	 he	 was enjoying	watching	the	boy	squirm.

“May	I	sit	down?”	he	finally	asked.

“Ah	…	sure,”	Dillon	responded.

Geoffrey	 pulled	 a	 chair	 over	 and	 sat	 down.	 “Janeen	 told	 me	 that	 you	 were wondering	about	the	symbol	we	have	carved	on	our	wall	at	the	front	desk.”

Dillon	didn’t	say	a	word.	The	sound	of	his	heart	was	deafening	in	his	ears.

“You	know	Dillon,	as	I	told	Janeen,	we	don’t	really	know	what	that	symbol

means.	But	you	know	that’s	not	true	don’t	you?”

Dillon	didn’t	say	a	word.

“This	isn’t	a	game,”	Geoffrey	warned.	“You	need	to	think	about	your	family

here.”

Dillon	didn’t	miss	the	threat.

“Besides,”	Geoffrey	continued,	“how	do	you	know	that	this	Orion	Group	has

your	best	interests	in	mind?	You	don’t	even	know	anything	about	them.”

“Wait.	 How	 do	 you	 know	 about	 Orion?”	 Dillon	 blurted,	 not	 able	 to	 think about	the	implication	of	his	admission	of	being	in	contact	with	Orion.

Geoffrey	smiled.	“We	know	more	than	you	think	we	do,”	he	stated	coldly.	“If

I	 were	 you	 I	 would	 consider	 not	 going	 any	 further	 with	 them.	 Orion	 will	 only bring	you	pain	and	suffering.	And	I	can’t	stand	to	see	such	young	people	suffer.”

Dillon	 thought	 about	 what	 Geoffrey	 was	 telling	 him,	 then	 built	 up	 the courage	to	ask,	“What	did	you	do	with	John	and	Tom	Tom?”

Geoffrey	was	silent	for	a	moment,	then	responded,	“I	really	don’t	know	what

you’re	 talking	 about.	 But	 if	 I	 were	 you,	 I	 would	 just	 enjoy	 the	 rest	 of	 my vacation	and	forget	Orion.	They	aren’t	what	they	seem.”

The	aged	man	stood	up	and	put	the	chair	back	where	he	got	it	from.	“You’re

so	young	and	you	have	much	to	live	for	Dillon.	Orion	will	take	those	years	from

you.	That’s	what	they	do.	They	use	people	and	spit	them	out	when	they	have	no

more	need	for	them.	Be	careful.	Despite	what	you	might	think,	I’m	on	your	side,

and	they	aren’t.”

Dillon	just	sat	there	dumbfounded	about	what	he	was	hearing.	Was	this	man

speaking	the	truth	about	Orion,	or	just	trying	to	place	doubts	in	his	mind?

“Well,	 you	 have	 a	 good	 night	 Dillon.	 I	 hope	 you	 make	 the	 right	 choice,”

Geoffrey	said	as	he	turned	and	walked	from	the	room.

Dillon	sat	back,	trying	to	digest	what	he	just	heard.	Was	Orion	the	bad	guy



here?	He	truly	didn’t	know,	and	that’s	what	scared	him	the	most.

DILLON	LAID	 IN	 BED	 LOOKING	 AT	 THE	 WALL.	 DESPITE	 GEOFFREY’S	 WARNING	 HE

had	decided	to	trust	that	what	he	was	doing	with	Derek	was	the	right	thing	to	do.

It	was	a	monumental	struggle	in	his	mind,	but	after	replaying	all	the	events	that had	 led	 him	 to	 this	 point	 he	 knew	 that	 his	 best	 option	 was	 to	 see	 the	 mission through.

He	 had	 his	 back	 to	 his	 brother	 who	 was	 in	 the	 other	 bed	 beside	 his.	 By	 all accounts	Jordan	appeared	to	be	fast	asleep.	Dillon	rolled	over	slowly,	trying	not to	make	too	much	of	a	stir.	He	turned	his	head	and	saw	that	Jordan	was	laying	on his	side	facing	away	from	him.	He	looked	at	the	clock	on	the	stand	next	to	his

bed—	it	read	12:42	AM.	He	knew	he	had	to	go	right	away	if	he	planned	to	make

it	to	the	rendezvous	point	with	Derek	on-time.

He	pulled	the	covers	off	as	slowly	was	he	could,	not	wanting	to	cause	more

of	a	stir	than	was	necessary.	He	was	already	fully	dressed.	Somehow	he	managed

to	 climb	 into	 bed	 that	 night	 without	 Jordan	 realizing	 that	 he	 didn’t	 change	 into his	pyjama’s.	He	was	actually	quite	impressed	with	the	feat	as	he	really	did	put his	pj’s	on	at	one	point	and	made	sure	that	Jordan	saw	him.	Then,	when	Jordan

went	 to	 use	 the	 restroom	 just	 before	 bed,	 Dillon	 quickly	 shed	 his	 pj’s,	 jammed them	 under	 the	 bed,	 and	 put	 his	 clothes	 on	 again.	 He	 then	 climbed	 into	 bed before	 Jordan	 noticed	 and	 pretended	 to	 drop	 into	 a	 level	 four	 coma.	 It	 was ingenious!	At	least	that’s	what	he	kept	telling	himself.

The	 fact	 that	 Jordan	 was	 in	 such	 a	 deep	 sleep	 already	 was	 amazing,	 as	 his brother	 was	 a	 bit	 of	 a	 night-owl.	 He	 originally	 thought	 this	 was	 going	 to	 be	 a problem,	but	tonight	Jordan	drifted	off	to	sleep	faster	than	normal.	Perfect!

He	was	really	happy	at	this	point	that	he	managed	to	get	a	couple	hour	nap	in

after	 dinner.	 He	 was	 still	 feeling	 the	 effects	 of	 sleep	 deprivation	 since	 being	 at the	resort.

Dillon	crept	around	his	brother’s	bed	and	peeked	at	him	for	a	moment,	just	to

make	 sure	 he	 was	 out.	 All	 was	 good.	 Jordan	 was	 sleeping	 like	 a	 little	 baby.

Before	 he	 went	 for	 the	 door	 he	 checked	 his	 pockets	 to	 ensure	 that	 he	 had	 the watch	and	arrowhead.	He	then	grabbed	his	shoes	in	one	hand	and	slowly	turned

the	 lock	 with	 the	 other.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 rotation	 the	 lock	 made	 a	 distinctive

“click”	sound	and	Dillon	froze!	He	held	his	breath.	His	brother	stirred	for	just	a moment	 and	 then	 all	 was	 silent	 once	 more.	 Dillon	 let	 out	 his	 breath	 in	 a	 long slow	silent	sigh	then	started	to	turn	the	door	handle.

Once	outside	he	made	absolutely	sure	that	he	closed	the	door	as	quietly	as	he

could.	 He	 then	 slipped	 his	 shoes	 on	 and	 headed	 for	 the	 stairs.	 He	 was	 almost there	when	the	door	on	the	other	side	of	the	hallway	right	across	from	the	stairs started	 to	 open.	 It	 was	 his	 parent’s	 room!	 Quickly	 he	 launched	 himself	 at	 the door	to	the	stairway,	hoping	to	make	it	before	one	of	his	parents	came	out	and

saw	him.	As	he	went	through	the	door	he	glanced	back	to	see	his	Dad	looking

down	 at	 his	 phone	 as	 he	 exited	 his	 room.	 It	 was	 at	 that	 point	 that	 Dillon	 was extremely	happy	about	living	in	the	age	of	technology!	It	just	saved	his	butt!

The	doorway	to	the	stairs	closed	and	he	darted	down	as	fast	as	he	could	go,

not	sure	if	Dad	was	going	to	be	coming	through	the	stairway	as	well.	He	went

down	one	floor	and	stopped,	trying	to	hear	if	the	door	he	had	just	come	through

was	opening.	Nothing.	He	breathed	another	sigh	of	relief	and	continued	down	to

the	main	floor.

When	he	got	to	the	door	he	cracked	it	open	and	looked	down	each	side	of	the

hall.	 No	 one	 was	 there.	 He	 knew	 that	 the	 trick	 was	 going	 to	 be	 to	 make	 it through	the	lobby	without	being	seen	by	any	of	the	guest	service	agents.	He	was

also	hoping	that	no	one	was	watching	the	cameras	too	closely	so	as	to	send	out

someone	 from	 security	 to	 nab	 him—whether	 or	 not	 they	 were	 just	 doing	 their job,	or	were	actually	part	of	the	conspiracy	to	stop	him	and	Orion.	The	fact	that the	 mercenary	 from	 earlier	 didn’t	 report	 back	 into	 whoever	 it	 was	 that	 was behind	 all	 this	 would	 probably	 mean	 that	 the	 conspirator’s	 senses	 would	 be heightened.	He	had	to	trust	that	Derek	and	Orion	were	somehow	working	behind

the	scenes	in	order	to	execute	on	the	plan.

He	 didn’t	 feel	 comfortable	 trying	 to	 find	 a	 side	 entrance	 at	 this	 point	 and silently	berated	himself	for	not	doing	any	recon	of	the	resort	before	he	got	to	this point.	This	problem	of	the	lobby	wouldn’t	be	an	issue	if	he	had	just	been	more

diligent	in	his	planning.

The	lobby	was	a	concern	because,	at	this	point,	he	didn’t	know	who	he	could

trust.	 Obviously	 the	 head	 of	 the	 resort	 was	 in	 on	 it	 to	 some	 extent	 as	 was evidenced	by	his	talk	with	Geoffrey.

He	crept	into	the	hall	and	toward	the	lobby.	He	peeked	around	the	corner	and

didn’t	see	anyone	at	all.	He	moved	into	the	open	space	a	little	and	tried	to	see	if anyone	was	at	the	front	desk.	He	saw	someone	there	but	they	were	heading	away

from	him,	going	to	the	far	side	of	the	desk.	He	inched	a	little	more	into	the	lobby and	 then	 heard	 the	 distinctive	 ring	 of	 the	 elevator	 as	 it	 reached	 the	 main	 floor.

His	 heart	 began	 to	 pound.	 He	 quickly	 ran	 across	 the	 main	 area	 and	 ducked behind	the	fountain	before	the	door	opened.

He	 heard	 someone	 come	 into	 the	 lobby	 from	 the	 elevator	 hallway	 and	 start talking	to	the	guy	manning	the	front	desk.	He	knew	from	the	voice	that	it	was	his Dad!	He	peeked	around	the	fountain	and	saw	him	talking	with	the	guest	services

agent.

What’s	Dad	doing	down	here	so	late? Dillon	thought	to	himself.	He	strained to	 hear	 the	 conversation	 but	 couldn’t	 make	 out	 what	 they	 were	 talking	 about.

Then	he	noticed	that	his	Dad	had	his	laptop	with	him	and	was	showing	it	to	the

guest	services	guy.	It	looked	like	he	was	trying	to	deal	with	a	technical	issue	or something.

Thankfully	 the	 conversation	 didn’t	 take	 long	 and	 Dad	 seemed	 pleased	 with the	 answers	 he	 must	 have	 received	 from	 the	 man,	 as	 he	 shook	 his	 hand	 and headed	 back	 to	 the	 elevator.	 The	 agent	 started	 to	 walk	 to	 the	 end	 of	 the	 desk again	 and	 bent	 down,	 as	 if	 trying	 to	 retrieve	 something.	 Dillon	 knew	 that	 this was	 his	 only	 chance.	 He	 darted	 out	 from	 behind	 the	 fountain	 and	 sprinted	 as quietly	as	he	could	to	the	rotating	front	door	of	the	hotel.

He	burst	through	the	door	and	onto	the	main	strip	that	housed	the	resort	and

the	numerous	shops	that	catered	to	the	tourists.	Dillon	hadn’t	been	out	this	late	at night	before	and	was	surprised	to	see	that	the	shops	were	still	open	and	people, mostly	 adults,	 mingled	 about	 taking	 in	 all	 the	 lights	 and	 attractions.	 He	 heard music	 coming	 from	 down	 the	 strip	 and	 saw	 some	 sort	 of	 electric	 light	 show happening.	The	restaurant	that	was	across	from	the	hotel	turned	into	an	energetic

dance	 club	 and	 now	 had	 a	 sign	 at	 the	 front	 door	 which	 read:	 “No	 Minors Allowed.”

Dillon	had	to	shake	his	head	a	little	in	order	to	comprehend	the	scene.	The

transformation	 of	 the	 strip	 seemed	 surreal	 to	 him.	 It	 also	 made	 him	 wonder	 if Jordan	 had	 snuck	 out	 any	 of	 the	 previous	 nights	 to	 check	 out	 the	 attractions?

This	would	totally	have	been	his	scene!

He	 couldn’t	 dwell	 on	 those	 thoughts	 anymore	 as	 he	 knew	 that	 time	 was quickly	fading	away.	Despite	all	the	foot	traffic	on	the	boulevard	he	still	had	a sense	 that	 he	 didn’t	 want	 to	 be	 seen	 by	 anyone	 or	 any	 camera	 if	 possible.	 He tried	not	to	look	too	conspicuous	as	he	walked	across	the	street	and	then,	when

he	thought	no	one	was	looking,	he	darted	into	the	trees.	He	crept	through	the	tall stalks	staying	in	their	shadows	as	he	moved	toward	the	front	gate.	It	was	good

that	 the	 resort	 property	 didn’t	 have	 a	 wall	 around	 it,	 just	 the	 trees	 and	 other shrubs	that	added	to	the	beauty	of	the	place.	It	was	also	good	that	the	front	gate was	a	ways	away	from	all	the	action.

As	 he	 approached	 the	 gate	 building	 he	 noticed	 a	 light	 on	 inside.	 Slowly	 he came	to	the	side	of	the	building	right	under	the	window.	He	carefully	rose	up	and peeked	inside.	He	scanned	the	area	and	didn’t	see	anyone.	He	was	about	to	move

on	when	he	noticed	a	door	on	the	inside	swing	open	and	he	heard	the	sound	of	a

toilet	flush.	The	sudden	movement	of	the	door	startled	him	and	he	ducked	back

down	 below	 the	 window.	 After	 a	 moment	 he	 dared	 to	 glance	 back	 over	 the windowsill	 again.	 Unfortunately	 the	 window	 was	 open	 and	 the	 smell	 of	 the restroom	 hit	 him.	 He	 silently	 gaged	 but	 managed	 to	 hold	 it	 in.	 Once	 the	 water from	 his	 eyes	 cleared	 he	 noticed	 a	 middle-aged	 man	 reclining	 easily	 in	 a	 large chair.	 He	 had	 a	 42”	 screen	 TV	 mounted	 on	 the	 wall	 and	 was	 scrolling	 through the	Netflix	selections.

Dillon	wasn’t	sure	how	distracted	the	guard	was	but	didn’t	want	to	take	any

chances;	he	knew	he	couldn’t	get	caught.	He	looked	around	on	the	ground	and

found	the	largest	stone	he	could.	It	was	about	the	size	of	small	apple.	He	peeked through	 the	 window	 once	 more	 and	 saw	 that	 the	 guard	 was	 still	 surfing	 for something	to	watch.	He	ducked	back	down	and	scooted	around	to	the	side	of	the

guard	house	closest	to	the	road.	As	he	glanced	around	the	corner	he	noticed	that

the	door	was	open. Perfect! 	 he	 thought	 to	 himself.	 He	 lobbed	 the	 stone	 toward the	 entrance.	 It	 hit	 the	 ground	 with	 a	 crack	 and	 rolled	 into	 the	 night.	 Quickly, Dillon	 ducked	 back	 around	 the	 corner	 and	 peeked	 through	 the	 window	 again.

The	guard	didn’t	show	any	signs	that	he	noticed	anything.

This	guy	must	be	deaf! he	exclaimed	to	himself,	as	the	night	was	incredibly quiet,	and	the	TV	wasn’t	playing	anything	yet.

As	 he	 was	 pondering	 his	 circumstance	 the	 guard	 suddenly	 got	 up.	 Dillon ducked	 beneath	 the	 windowsill	 again.	 He	 could	 hear	 the	 heavy	 footfalls	 of	 the man’s	boots	on	the	wood	floor. Really!	I	can	hear	his	boots	and	he	couldn’t	hear that	rock! Dillon	shouted	in	his	head.

The	footsteps	were	getting	closer	to	the	window.	Dillon	put	his	back	against

the	 wall	 as	 flat	 as	 he	 could,	 then	 started	 to	 move	 toward	 the	 corner	 of	 the building	again	as	quietly	as	possible.

He	looked	both	ways	when	he	got	to	the	road,	and	glanced	back	just	to	make

sure	the	guard	wasn’t	sticking	his	head	out	the	open	window.	All	was	clear.	He

looked	up	to	see	where	the	cameras	were	mounted	and	figured	that	he	might	be

able	to	stay	in	a	blind	spot	if	he	stuck	close	to	the	wall.

He	could	feel	his	heart	pound	within	his	chest	as	he	moved	around	the	corner

and	toward	the	open	door.	As	he	got	to	the	door	he	poked	his	head	through	the

opening	 for	 a	 second	 and	 saw	 that	 the	 guard	 was	 still	 at	 the	 window,	 probably getting	 some	 fresh	 air.	 He	 knew	 he	 had	 to	 move.	 He	 sucked	 in	 his	 breath	 and darted	across	the	doorway	and	around	the	corner	of	the	building	as	quickly	and

quietly	as	he	could.	He	didn’t	even	stop	to	see	if	the	guard	had	noticed	anything as	he	ran	into	the	darkness	once	more.

He	moved	up	the	road	through	the	trees,	trying	to	avoid	all	the	street	lights	as he	 went.	 He	 must	 have	 gone	 about	 three	 hundred	 yards	 before	 he	 saw	 Derek’s car	parked	off	the	side	of	the	road	and	into	the	tree	line	a	bit.	As	he	approached he	noticed	that	Derek	was	standing	about	ten	feet	in	front	of	the	car.	He	walked back	and	forth	with	his	phone	to	his	ear	and	waved	his	other	hand	around	as	he

spoke	to	whoever	it	was.	It	almost	looked	like	he	was	angry,	or	maybe	frustrated about	something.

Dillon	 went	 passed	 the	 car	 and	 approached	 Derek,	 not	 trying	 to	 be	 stealthy

anymore.	Derek	spun	around	quickly,	grabbed	his	gun	from	behind	his	back	and pointed	it	right	at	Dillon,	all	while	still	holding	the	phone	to	his	ear.

Dillon	 jumped	 back	 and	 held	 his	 hands	 up	 reflexively.	 “Whoa!”	 he	 yelled.

“It’s	just	me!”

Derek	 smiled	 and	 lowered	 the	 gun.	 “I	 have	 to	 go,”	 he	 said	 into	 the	 phone.

Dillon	 could	 hear	 someone	 on	 the	 other	 end	 but	 couldn’t	 make	 out	 what	 they were	 saying.	 “I	 understand,”	 came	 Derek’s	 reply.	 “Don’t	 worry.	 We’ll	 make	 it happen.	 The	 boy’s	 here	 now.	 Bye.”	 He	 took	 the	 phone	 away	 from	 his	 ear	 and hung	up	from	whoever	it	was.

“Who’s	that?”	Dillon	asked.

“Just	someone	who’s	interested	in	our	success	tonight,”	Derek	replied	as	he

came	closer	to	his	young	friend.	“Did	you	bring	the	watch	and	arrowhead.”

Dillon	nodded	as	he	produced	them	from	his	pocket.

“Awesome.	I	have	a	feeling	that	those	are	going	to	come	in	handy	tonight.”

“What	about	John’s	field	gear?”	Dillon	asked.

“It’s	in	the	car.”

“Good,	because	I	have	a	feeling	that	we’re	going	to	need	 that	bag	tonight	as well,”	Dillon	responded.	He	had	already	reasoned	that	John	packed	the	gear	for

his	excursion	under	the	Oasis;	an	excursion	that	never	took	place.

“Come	on,”	Derek	said.	He	motioned	for	Dillon	to	get	in	the	car.	“We	should

be	going	as	we	can’t	waste	any	more	time.”

“Before	 we	 do,	 you	 should	 know	 that	 earlier	 tonight	 a	 man	 name	 Geoffrey Eagles-rock	 paid	 me	 a	 visit	 tonight	 and	 tried	 to	 convince	 me	 that	 the	 Orion Group	is	not	to	be	trusted.	He	said	that	you	guys	are	using	me,	and	that	no	good will	come	to	me	if	I	help	you.”

“Then	why	did	you	come?”	Derek	asked.

“Because	 I	 have	 faith	 that	 you’re	 telling	 me	 the	 truth.	 Everything	 that’s happened	 to	 me	 up	 to	 this	 point	 is	 telling	 me	 that	 there’s	 something	 bad happening	 here	 and	 that	 you	 guys	 seem	 to	 be	 the	 only	 ones	 willing	 to	 do anything	about	it.”

“It	sounds	like	this	Geoffrey	guy	is	scared	of	you	Dillon.”

Dillon	was	taken	back	by	that	statement.	“Scared	of	me?	Why?”

“Because	 they	 see	 that	 you	 are	 a	 threat	 to	 them.	 And	 now	 that	 you’re working	with	us,	it’s	just	a	matter	of	time	before	we	really	find	out	what	they’re up	to.”

“But	I’m	only	a	twelve	year	old	boy!”	Dillon	spouted.	“How	could	I	be	scary

to	anyone?”

“Yes.	A	remarkable	twelve	year	old,”	Derek	replied	with	a	smile.	“You	might

not	think	so	now	Dillon,	but	you’re	destined	for	something	greater.”

“How	do	you	know	that?”

“There’s	 just	 something	 about	 you	 that	 tells	 me	 that,”	 Derek	 replied

cryptically	 as	 he	 opened	 the	 door	 to	 the	 car.	 “You	 might	 not	 believe	 it,	 but someday	you	will.	Now,	shall	we	go?”

Dillon	 didn’t	 know	 how	 to	 respond.	 He	 thought	 that	 maybe	 Derek	 was	 just trying	to	be	nice.	Kind	of	like	those	people	who	just	say	good	stuff	about	you	but might	not	mean	it;	they’re	just	trying	to	be	positive	but	have	nothing	logical	to back	it	up	with.	He	let	the	thought	drop	and	climbed	into	the	car.

As	 they	 headed	 down	 the	 road	 toward	 the	 information	 center	 they	 didn’t know	what	to	expect,	if	anything.	In	a	few	minutes	they	knew	they	would	find

out.	 It	 was	 that	 anticipation	 of	 the	 unknown	 that	 had	 Dillon	 nervous.	 His stomach	 was	 in	 knots.	 He	 looked	 over	 at	 Derek	 and	 saw	 a	 man	 who	 appeared focused	on	one	task	and	one	task	only:	to	find	out	what	happened	to	John.

Dillon	had	this	strange	feeling,	as	the	hairs	on	the	back	of	his	neck	stood	up,

that	the	only	thing	that	would	stop	Derek	was	death	itself.

He	really	hoped	it	didn’t	come	down	to	that.





20

A N 	 E N C O U N T E R 	 W I T H 	 A 	 S N A K E

The	first	few	seconds	of	the	trip	were	quiet	as	Derek	and	Dillon	kept

their	thoughts	to	themselves.

“So	 …	 how	 was	 your	 day?”	 Dillon	 asked,	 trying	 to	 break	 the

silence.

Derek	just	smiled	and	kept	his	eyes	forward,	not	saying	a	word.

“Do	you	like	being	an	agent	for	a	secret	organization?”

Silence.

Dillon	looked	around	for	something	to	fidget	with	as	Derek	didn’t	seem	to	be

in	a	talkative	mood.	He	was	trying	his	hardest	to	break	the	awkward	silence	but

was	failing	miserably.

He	didn’t	really	know	this	guy	and	now	he	was	in	a	car	with	him	heading	out

to	 do	 who-knew-what	 as	 they	 really	 didn’t	 know	 what	 to	 expect.	 It	 was	 weird though.	Dillon	just	had	this	feeling	that	he	could	trust	Derek	and	he	didn’t	know why.	It	was	the	same	kind	of	feeling	he	had	when	he	knew	that	the	watch	was

important	 somehow	 but	 could	 not	 explain	 how	 he	 knew	 that.	 Or	 the	 feeling	 he had	with	the	arrowhead,	and	when	he	just	knew	he	had	to	hide	the	watch	and	the

arrowhead	in	his	room	which	saved	them	from	being	discovered	when	his	room

was	searched.	In	each	of	these	circumstances	his	gut	had	been	right.

Maybe	 his	 trust	 in	 the	 man	 showed	 his	 naiveté	 as	 he	 was	 only	 twelve	 and didn’t	 have	 much	 life	 experience	 yet?	 No,	 he	 reasoned.	 There	 was	 something else.	At	least	he	hoped	his	feelings	were	accurate	because	this	is	how	kids	ended

up	going	missing!	Maybe	Derek	was	going	to	take	him	and	sell	him	as	a	child laborer	 somewhere	 he	 thought.	 He	 laughed	 inside.	 There	 were	 easier	 ways	 to steal	 a	 kid	 then	 to	 fabricate	 some	 fanciful	 tale	 of	 working	 for	 a	 secret organization	who	is	trying	to	help	a	member	of	theirs	who	had	disappeared.	Not

to	 mention	 Derek	 saving	 his	 life.	 No.	 He	 believed	 that	 Derek	 was	 telling	 the truth	 and	 that	 the	 man	 did	 need	 his	 help	 finding	 John.	 Dillon	 pushed	 all	 the unpleasant	thoughts	aside	and	rehearsed	all	the	weird	stuff	that	had	happened	up to	this	point	which	confirmed	Derek’s	story.

“So	 I’ve	 been	 meaning	 to	 ask	 you	 something	 but	 I	 keep	 forgetting,”	 Dillon piped	up	at	last	as	he	produced	the	small	metal	object	he	found	when	the	coyote

burst	into	flames	in	front	of	him.	“What’s	this?”

Derek	took	it	from	Dillon’s	hand	and	glanced	at	it.	“I	don’t	know.	Where	did

you	find	it?”

“It	came	out	of	one	of	those	creatures	that	attacked	me	at	the	center.”

“How	did	you	get	it?”

“I	 found	 it	 in	 the	 pile	 of	 ash	 after	 it	 burned	 up.	 I	 figured	 it	 would	 be important,	 or	 at	 least	 a	 clue	 of	 something,	 but	 I	 haven’t	 been	 able	 to	 find	 out what	it	is	or	what	it	does.”

Derek	looked	equally	as	puzzled	as	he	handed	it	back	to	Dillon.	“There	are

more	 than	 enough	 mysteries	 happening	 here	 that	 we	 need	 to	 crack,”	 he	 said soberly.

Dillon	nodded	as	he	placed	it	back	in	his	pocket.

“So	how	did	you	get	involved	with	The	Orion	Group?”	Dillon	asked,	trying

to	pry	more	information	out	of	his	new	friend.	And	now	that	Derek	was	actually

speaking	 he	 thought	 he	 would	 capitalize	 on	 the	 opportunity	 for	 him	 to	 learn more.

Derek	was	silent	for	a	moment.	“It’s	a	long	story	Dillon,”	he	said	cryptically.

Dillon	figured	that	it	was	probably	a	good	idea	to	leave	it	at	that.	He	was	sure that	Derek	would	open	up	to	him	when	he	felt	he	wanted	to	and	not	a	moment

before.

“So	…	do	you	have	a	family?”	Dillon	asked,	thinking	that	the	question	was

innocent	enough	and	less	invasive.

Derek	glanced	over	at	him	and	then	looked	to	the	road	again	without	saying a	word.

“Sorry,	but	I	get	talkative	when	I’m	nervous.”

“It’s	gonna	be	okay	Dillon,”	Derek	reassured,	not	even	looking	over	at	him.

“I’ll	do	everything	I	can	to	keep	you	safe.	As	a	matter	of	fact,	when	we	find	the entrance	I	don’t	want	you	coming	in	with	me.	After	I’m	finished	what	I	need	to

do,	I’ll	take	you	back	to	the	resort.”

Dillon	liked	the	man’s	confidence,	but	didn’t	like	the	suggestion	that	Derek

didn’t	want	him	seeing	it	through	to	the	end.	“But	…	”	he	stammered.

“No	Dillon!”	Derek	said	as	he	raised	his	voice.	“Your	job	ends	when	we	find

the	entrance.”

He	 immediately	 calmed.	 “You’ve	 done	 well.	 Very	 well.	 Better	 than	 anyone could	have	expected,	but	I	can’t	have	you	risking	your	life	anymore.”

“But	I’m	still	in	danger,”	Dillon	argued.

“Not	if	I	can	neutralize	the	aggressor.	That	should	give	you	peace	of	mind.”

Dillon	 thought	 of	 a	 hundred	 good	 arguments	 about	 why	 he	 should	 go	 with Derek	but	realized	that	they	would	be	of	no	use.	Instead,	he	sat	silently	for	the rest	 of	 the	 drive.	 When	 they	 arrived,	 Derek	 turned	 off	 his	 headlights	 before	 he came	to	a	stop	in	front	of	the	center.

As	the	two	of	them	got	out	the	first	thing	they	noticed	was	the	stillness	in	the air.	There	was	no	wind	and	there	weren’t	any	clouds	in	the	sky.	The	stars	shone

brightly.	 Here,	 practically	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 nowhere,	 the	 sky	 burst	 to	 life	 with sparkling	 light.	 Dillon	 always	 marvelled	 at	 the	 sereneness	 of	 it	 all.	 He	 looked back	toward	the	resort	and	saw	the	lights	shining	on	the	horizon.

He	was	suddenly	brought	back	to	reality,	however,	with	the	far	off	sound	of	a

coyote.	 He	 shivered	 slightly.	 He	 knew	 that	 those	 coyotes	 out	 there	 at	 that moment	were	most	likely	not	the	demonic	kind	that	tried	to	kill	him	a	few	days

earlier;	but	the	sound	of	them	nonetheless	sent	a	chill	down	his	spine.

Derek	went	to	the	trunk,	opened	it	up,	and	slung	John’s	backpack	onto	one	of

his	shoulders.	“After	we	find	the	entrance	I’m	going	to	need	the	compass.”

Dillon	 looked	 at	 him	 curiously	 at	 first	 then	 clued	 in—the	 watch	 with	 its accompanying	 arrowhead.	 Derek	 smiled	 when	 he	 saw	 the	 lights	 go	 on	 in

Dillon’s	head.	“Come	on,”	he	said	as	he	started	moving	across	the	street	toward the	center.	Dillon	followed	close	behind.

When	they	got	to	the	door	Derek	pulled	out	his	phone	tapped	one	of	the	apps

on	it	and	then	reached	in	his	pocket	for	a	short	cord	that	had	a	key-looking	thing on	 the	 end	 of	 it.	 He	 plugged	 the	 key	 into	 the	 door	 and	 the	 other	 end	 into	 his phone.	 Dillon	 watched	 and	 marvelled.	 In	 a	 moment	 the	 alarm	 system	 was	 shut down	and	the	lock	turned	open.

“That’s	awesome!”	Dillon	whispered	a	little	louder	than	he	meant	to.	“How

can	I	get	an	app	like	that?”	he	asked	a	little	quieter.

“It’s	standard	issue,”	replied	Derek	with	a	smirk.

“Just	 like	 the	 other	 device	 you	 used	 on	 John’s	 house?”	 Dillon	 asked	 with	 a smile.	“I’m	starting	to	like	this	Orion	Group,”	he	said	in	admiration.	“Hey	why

didn’t	you	use	that	other	device	on	this	door?”

“That	one	won’t	work	on	this	type	of	lock,”	he	replied	as	he	cracked	the	door

open	and	he	and	Dillon	slipped	inside.	He	then	reached	in	his	pocket	and	pulled

out	a	small	flashlight	and	started	to	look	around	cautiously.	All	seemed	normal.

“Try	to	be	as	quiet	as	you	can,”	he	whispered	to	Dillon	as	he	drew	out	his	hand

gun.	“Just	because	the	place	looks	empty	doesn’t	mean	it	is.	Trust	me.	I’ve	had	a ton	of	experience	with	this	stuff.”

Dillon	 swallowed	 hard	 as	 he	 followed	 Derek	 through	 the	 maze	 of

merchandise	 to	 the	 back	 hallway.	 As	 they	 moved	 through	 the	 place	 Dillon spotted	a	360	degree	security	camera	staring	at	them	from	the	ceiling.	He	tugged on	Derek’s	arm	and	pointed	it	out.

“Don’t	worry,”	said	Derek	in	hushed	tones.	“It’s	stuck	on	the	images	which

were	being	filmed	just	before	we	opened	the	door.”

“Another	app?”

“Yup.”

“That’s	cool!”

Derek	smiled	for	a	moment	then	turned	cold-faced	as	he	continued	through

the	center.	“Just	in	case	you’re	wondering,	we’re	heading	to	the	back	room	first because	that’s	where	you	said	Tom	Tom	disappeared	from.	That’s	probably	the

most	 likely	 spot	 for	 an	 entrance	 to	 an	 underground	 lair.”	 Dillon	 just	 knew	 that

Derek’s	years	of	training	and	self-discipline	must	have	been	kicking	in	as	he	was probably	 beginning	 to	 expect	 the	 worst.	 Dillon	 understood	 the	 logic	 of	 his reasoning	clearly	and	followed	closely	behind.

They	made	it	to	the	back	room	without	incident.	It	was	pretty	much	the	same

as	it	was	the	last	time	Dillon	had	seen	it;	nothing	was	out	of	the	ordinary.	“I’m sure	 the	 entrance	 is	 in	 here	 somewhere,”	 Derek	 said	 as	 he	 turned	 to	 Dillon.

“Let’s	fan	out	and	look	around.”

Dillon	 nodded,	 not	 wanting	 to	 appear	 scared.	 The	 truth	 was	 that	 he	 was terrified!	He	had	already	been	attacked	once	by	creatures	that	seemed	demonic

and	 wasn’t	 interested	 in	 going	 through	 that	 again.	 Nevertheless	 he	 steeled	 his nerves,	 pulled	 out	 his	 phone,	 turned	 on	 the	 light,	 and	 took	 the	 opposite	 side	 of the	room	from	Derek.

“Just	yell	if	you	see	something,”	Derek	said	as	he	moved	behind	some	boxes.

Dillon	 searched	 the	 wall	 area	 first	 then	 started	 to	 move	 into	 the	 inside.	 He could	hear	Derek	move	boxes	and	racks	out	of	the	way	as	he	looked.	They	both

searched	 for	 what	 seemed	 to	 be	 a	 long	 while.	 In	 reality	 it	 was	 less	 than	 fifteen minutes.

“See	anything	yet?”	asked	Derek	from	the	darkness.

“No.	You?”

“Nothing.	 There	 has	 to	 be	 a	 hidden	 door	 or	 something	 here	 somewhere,”

Derek	 said.	 His	 tone	 starting	 to	 edge	 toward	 frustration.	 “Let’s	 move	 some	 of these	boxes	around	and	take	a	thorough	look.”

Derek	met	Dillon	in	the	middle	and	they	started	moving	the	boxes	out	of	the

way	and	looking	more	closely	at	the	floor.	Dillon	was	down	on	his	knees	trying

to	 discern	 whether	 or	 not	 there	 were	 edges	 to	 a	 door	 or	 something	 when	 a thought	struck	him.	He	pulled	out	the	watch	and	arrowhead,	attached	them,	and

waited	 to	 see	 what	 happened.	 At	 first	 the	 arrow	 head	 kept	 pointing	 toward Derek.

“Hey	Derek.	Are	you	still	carrying	that	stone	from	John’s	backpack?”

Derek	nodded.

“Let’s	 take	 it	 out	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 chuck	 it	 as	 far	 as	 you	 can	 to	 the	 other side	of	the	room.”

“Why?”	Derek	asked.

“I	have	a	hunch	that	this	stone	comes	from	somewhere	below	the	Oasis	and

that	John	knew	it	could	lead	him	to	the	entrance,	but	we	won’t	know	if	that	stone is	anywhere	near	the	arrowhead	as	that’s	all	it’s	picking	up.	So	I’m	thinking—”

“That	 there’s	 probably	 another	 magnetic	 field	 close	 by	 that	 will	 pull	 on	 the arrowhead	which	should	lead	us	to	the	entrance,”	Derek	finished.

“Exactly!”

“That’s	ingenious	Dillon!”	Derek	pulled	the	rock	out	of	the	pack	and	tossed

it	as	far	as	he	could	to	the	entrance	where	they	entered	the	room.	The	arrowhead followed	the	stone	at	first	and	then	spun	around	in	the	opposite	direction.	Dillon smiled	widely.	He	got	up	and	started	following	the	“needle.”	It	pointed	generally at	 the	 back	 wall	 and	 then	 started	 to	 angle	 toward	 the	 corner.	 Derek	 joined	 him and	the	two	of	them	kept	following	it	until	they	came	to	a	stop	at	the	corner	of the	building.

They	 immediately	 started	 feeling	 the	 wall	 for	 a	 door	 way,	 hatch,	 or

something	 that	 would	 open	 up	 but	 there	 was	 nothing.	 Derek	 shone	 his	 light	 all up	 and	 down	 the	 wall	 in	 desperation	 but	 couldn’t	 see	 anything	 out	 of	 the ordinary.

“It’s	useless,”	he	said	finally.	“Maybe	John	was	wrong	about	his	suspicion.”

“Or	maybe	not,”	replied	Dillon	as	he	moved	toward	Derek	who	had	stepped

away	 from	 the	 wall.	 Dillon	 looked	 closely	 at	 Derek’s	 shoulder	 where	 he	 had slung	 the	 pack.	 Derek	 looked	 back	 at	 him	 curiously	 trying	 to	 discern	 where	 he was	staring.

Dillon	reached	up	and	touched	a	loose	thread	on	the	bag	that	was	apparently

wavering	in	the	breeze.	But	they	were	inside	and	there	shouldn’t	be	any	breeze

except	 from	 an	 air	 conditioning	 unit	 and	 the	 air	 conditioning	 vent	 was	 on	 the other	side	of	the	room.	Derek	looked	down	and	saw	it	as	well.	Dillon	followed

the	direction	of	where	he	thought	the	breeze	was	coming	from.	He	put	his	hand

to	the	floor	and	moved	it	ever-so-slightly	along.	Nothing	seemed	to	be	out	of	the ordinary.	 Then,	 out	 of	 the	 corner	 of	 his	 eye	 he	 saw	 the	 needle	 on	 the	 watch-compass	spinning	in	circles.

He	 felt	 around	 on	 the	 floor	 with	 more	 determination	 until	 he	 felt	 it.	 There

was	a	light	breeze	coming	up	from	between	one	of	the	seams	in	the	tile	flooring.

“Feel	this!”	Dillon	exclaimed.

Derek	put	his	hand	to	the	floor	and	felt	the	same	light	breeze	coming	up	from

somewhere	 below.	 They	 exchanged	 knowing	 looks.	 “There’s	 an	 open	 space

down	there,”	Derek	said	excitedly.

“Ya,	but	where’s	the	latch?”

The	tile	had	lots	of	grooves	and	smooth	rock	formations	all	over	it.	As	Dillon

moved	his	hand	slowly	along	its	surface	he	felt	an	unnatural	depression	in	part	of the	stone	that	appeared	to	be	carved	out	with	a	tool	or	something.	It	was	a	little bigger	than	the	size	of	a	finger.	He	pushed	down	a	little	on	it	and	felt	it	depress like	 it	 was	 under	 tension.	 When	 he	 removed	 his	 finger	 the	 piece	 of	 tile	 sprung back	up	to	be	flush	with	the	rest	of	the	stone.

He	 looked	 up	 at	 Derek.	 “You	 might	 want	 to	 step	 back,”	 he	 said,	 a	 serious expression	splayed	across	his	face.

Derek	complied	without	even	a	word.	Dillon	pushed	down	on	the	tile	button.

A	loud	click	was	heard	and	then	a	large	square	section	of	the	tile	gave	way	and

swung	 down—being	 hinged	 on	 one	 side—to	 reveal	 a	 dark	 hole.	 Immediately they	could	feel	a	rush	of	air	enter	the	room	from	the	corridor	below.	“This	must have	been	how	they	grabbed	Tom	Tom.”

Derek	 patted	 Dillon	 on	 the	 back.	 “Good	 job	 kid.	 Now	 let’s	 see	 where	 this thing	 goes,”	 he	 said,	 pulling	 the	 backpack	 off	 his	 shoulder	 and	 kneeling	 at	 the edge	of	the	hole.

Dillon	looked	into	the	dark	passageway,	a	chill	going	up	his	back.

“Alright	kid.	I’ll	see	you	in	a	bit	if	all	goes	well,”	Derek	said	as	he	held	his hand	out	indicating	that	he	needed	the	watch	and	arrowhead.	Dillon	was	about	to

hand	 it	 over	 when	 they	 suddenly	 heard	 a	 low	 hissing	 sound	 coming	 from somewhere	in	the	direction	of	the	entrance	to	the	room.

“What	was	that?”	Dillon	blurted.

They	 spun	 around	 and	 saw	 something	 moving	 through	 the	 merchandise,

toppling	 boxes,	 and	 knocking	 over	 racks.	 Derek	 pulled	 his	 gun.	 Both	 he	 and Dillon	 shone	 their	 lights	 in	 the	 direction	 trying	 to	 discern	 what	 was	 coming	 at them.	 Whatever	 it	 was,	 it	 was	 getting	 closer.	 “We	 know	 you’re	 there!	 Come

out!”	Derek	screamed.

The	hissing	was	getting	louder.

“Get	behind	me	Dillon!”	Derek	yelled.	Dillon	didn’t	have	to	be	asked	twice.

Out	of	the	darkness	a	large	snakelike	creature	emerged,	towering	about	seven

feet.	It	had	a	large	head,	yellow	glowing	eyes,	and	two	thick	arms	riddled	with

scales	and	ending	in	three	clawed	fingers.

Dillon’s	face	went	pale,	but	Derek	steeled	his	look	and	tightened	his	stance.

He	 fired	 two	 shots	 into	 the	 creatures	 torso.	 It	 appeared	 to	 sting	 the	 beast	 as	 it recoiled	slightly.	Then	it	whipped	it’s	head	around	and	lunged.

Derek	pushed	Dillon	out	of	the	way	as	he	dove	to	the	other	side.	He	crashed

into	 the	 wall,	 while	 Dillon	 skidded	 across	 the	 floor,	 scraping	 his	 knees	 and elbows	on	the	rough	tile.

The	 creature	 had	 dived	 passed	 the	 two	 and	 was	 already	 turning	 for	 another strike.	 It	 was	 about	 to	 pounce	 at	 Dillon	 when	 suddenly	 the	 lights	 to	 the	 room came	on.	The	creature	recoiled	at	the	brightness.	Derek	shot	it	again.	It	flinched and	 hissed	 at	 him	 but	 turned	 toward	 Dillon.	 It	 launched	 at	 him,	 pushing	 itself with	its	strong	tail.	Dillon	knew	he	didn’t	have	time	to	get	clear	and	thought	that this	was	the	last	thing	he	would	ever	see.	The	snake-thing	was	about	to	grab	him with	its	thick	arms	when	Dillon	felt	himself	flying	through	the	air	to	the	side	as something	tackled	him.	He	hit	the	floor	again	forcefully,	the	wind	being	blasted from	his	lungs.	He	struggled,	unsure	of	what	flew	into	him	when	he	noticed	that

his	brother	Jordan	was	on	top	of	him.

“What?”	he	yelled	in	confusion.

“You	just	gonna	let	that	thing	get	you,	you	dork?”	Jordan	yelled	at	him.

Dillon	didn’t	know	what	to	think.	It	seemed	surreal	that	Jordan	was	here	but

he	 didn’t	 have	 time	 to	 process	 it.	 He	 noticed	 Derek	 run	 up	 beside	 him	 and	 his brother,	gun	in	one	hand	and	his	combat	knife	in	the	other.	Bang!	Another	shot

rang	out.

The	 creature	 responded	 by	 swiping	 Derek	 across	 the	 chest	 with	 its	 claws.

Derek	grunted	as	three	lines	of	blood	appeared	on	his	shirt.	By	this	time	Dillon and	Jordan	were	back	up	on	their	feet.	Derek	shot	again	and	wheeled	around	to

the	brothers.	He	dropped	John’s	pack	at	their	feet.	“Take	it	and	go!”	he	yelled	at

them.

Dillon	 hesitated.	 “Take	 it!”	 he	 yelled	 again	 as	 he	 turned	 back	 and	 barely ducked	another	strike	from	the	beast.

Dillon	 scooped	 it	 up	 quickly	 and	 moved	 to	 the	 side	 where	 the	 hole	 in	 the floor	was.	Jordan	grabbed	his	arm.	“Where	are	you	going?”

“We	don’t	have	time,”	Dillon	responded	emphatically	glancing	over	Jordan

for	a	moment	to	see	Derek	engaged	with	the	creature.

Jordan	glanced	back	then	turned	toward	Dillon.	“I	see	what	you	mean.”

The	snake	noticed	the	two	brothers	as	it	backhanded	Derek	aside.	The	man

flew	into	some	boxes	and	toppled	a	couple	of	clothing	racks.	Dillon	locked	eyes

with	the	thing	for	a	moment.	He	knew	it	was	going	to	strike.	“Go!”	he	yelled	to

his	brother.

Jordan	leaped	into	the	dark	hole.

The	 snake	 launched	 at	 Dillon	 just	 as	 he	 jumped	 in	 behind	 his	 brother.	 The clawed	 hand	 ripped	 through	 the	 air	 just	 above	 the	 boy’s	 head	 as	 he	 descended into	the	darkness.

Dillon	hit	the	ground	hard	and	almost	started	to	tumble	down	what	seemed	to

be	stairs,	but	managed	to	catch	himself.	He	noticed	that	Jordan	wasn’t	there	and heard	some	faint	grunts	coming	from	down	the	staircase.	He	looked	up	and	saw

the	snake	peering	into	the	hole.	It	looked	as	though	it	was	going	to	try	and	climb down.	Its	head	started	to	slither	through	when	suddenly	it	was	hit	by	something.

It	 hissed	 as	 though	 it	 was	 in	 pain	 and	 pushed	 away	 from	 the	 hole.	 Dillon flinched,	which	caused	him	to	lose	his	footing	and	he	started	to	tumble	down	the stairs	 into	 the	 darkness.	 He	 tried	 to	 stop	 his	 descent	 but	 couldn’t	 get	 a	 hold	 of anything	to	help	and	the	stairs	were	way	too	steep.

As	he	tumbled	into	the	darkness	he	could	hear	more	shots	ring	out	from	the

room	above.	Those	eventually	drowned	out	as	he	rolled	and	slid	deeper	into	the

gloom.





21

I N T O 	 T H E 	 D A R K N E S S

The	two	brothers	screamed	as	they	bounced	and	slid,	slid	and	bounced.

Fortunately	for	them	the	stairs	seemed	to	be	coated	with	some	sort	of

fungus	which	cushioned	their	rapid	descent	more	than	it	would	have	if

it	was	just	bare	stone.	They	slid	for	what	seemed	forever	and	then	were	spit	out at	the	bottom	into	a	large	room.	They	rolled	and	then	came	to	a	stop.	Neither	of them	wanted	to	get	up	and	just	laid	there	looking	at	the	ceiling.

The	 room	 had	 a	 small	 glow	 to	 it.	 Dillon	 could	 feel	 the	 sweat	 form	 on	 the palms	 of	 his	 hands.	 He	 started	 to	 breathe	 a	 little	 heavier	 as	 he	 took	 in	 his surroundings;	 familiarity	 to	 them	 struck	 him	 like	 lightening	 as	 he	 knew	 these were	the	same	images	from	his	dreams—his	nightmares.

He	 slowly	 climbed	 to	 his	 feet	 and	 tried	 to	 shake	 the	 dirt	 from	 his	 clothes.

Jordan	was	up	as	well	and	came	storming	over	to	him.

“You	 better	 tell	 me	 what’s	 going	 on	 right	 now	 little	 bro!”	 he	 yelled	 as	 he came	right	up	to	Dillon	and	grabbed	him	by	one	of	the	straps	on	his	pack.

Dillon	tried	to	pull	away	but	Jordan’s	grasp	was	too	much.	“Okay	okay,”	he

said,	 trying	 to	 calm	 his	 brother	 down.	 Jordan	 let	 go.	 He	 was	 about	 to	 answer when	a	curious	expression	came	across	his	face.

“How	did	you	know	where	I	was?”	he	asked.	“And	how	did	 you	get	to	the

center	anyway?”

“I’m	 not	 telling	 you	 anything	 until	 you	 start	 talking!”	 Jordan	 let	 go	 and shoved	Dillon	back.

Dillon	paused	for	a	moment	trying	to	collect	his	thoughts.	“Okay,	okay,”	he said,	patting	his	hands	in	the	air	trying	to	get	Jordan	to	calm	down.	“Well	…	a

man	named	John	Taylor	Sebastian	went	missing	about	a	year	and	a	half	ago	as

he	was	investigating	the	source	of	the	Oasis’s	rejuvenating	power.”

“And	this	friend	of	yours?”	Jordan	asked.

“He	 apparently	 works	 for	 the	 group	 who	 wanted	 John	 and	 his	 team	 to	 find the	 answer	 to	 this	 mystery.	 This	 group	 that	 he	 works	 for—The	 Orion	 Group—

are	the	ones	who	staged	Dad	to	get	the	trip	here.”

“What!	Why	would	they	do	that?”

Dillon	paused,	trying	to	think	of	the	best	way	to	explain	it	to	Jordan	without

sounding	like	a	total	crackpot.

“Well—?”	 Jordan’s	 frustration	 began	 to	 be	 more	 evident	 as	 Dillon	 didn’t immediately	answer.

“Because	they	think	that	I	have	some	abilities	that	will	be	able	to	help	them.”

He	 knew	 it	 sounded	 stupid	 but	 it	 was	 the	 truth.	 There	 it	 was.	 He	 was	 now officially	a	crackpot!

“What	kind	of	abilities?”	asked	Jordan	skeptically.

“I	 notice	 things,”	 replied	 Dillon	 cryptically. Great!	 That	 sounded	 even stupider! 	 he	 thought	 to	 himself.	 “I	 don’t	 know	 how	 to	 explain	 it,	 but	 I	 observe things	that	others	don’t.”

Jordan	looked	at	him	without	saying	a	word,	then	smirked.	“Sure	you	do,”	he

said	sarcastically.	“There	must	have	been	some	kind	of	mistake	with	this	Orion

Group	 drafting	 you.	 I	 mean	 …	 you’re	 only	 twelve!	 You	 can	 barely	 look	 after yourself	let	alone	help	some	secret	organization	find	a	missing	person.	It’s	like believing	that	I	can	shoot	lasers	out	of	my	butt!”

“Believe	what	you	want	then,”	Dillon	said	with	a	dismissive	wave.

Jordan	was	silent	for	a	moment.	“Sorry	man.	I’m	just	confused	about	all	this.

It’s	 a	 lot	 to	 process.	 How	 about	 you	 use	 your	 special	 abilities	 and	 get	 us	 outa here.	 And	 we’re	 not	 going	 back	 up	 there!”	 he	 said,	 indicating	 the	 stairs	 they rolled	down.

“No	 you	 don’t,”	 Dillon	 replied.	 “It’s	 your	 turn	 now.	 We’re	 not	 going

anywhere	until	you	tell	me	how	you	are	even	here!”

Jordan	shrugged	as	if	it	was	no	big	deal.	“I	knew	you	were	up	to	something ever	since	I	saw	you	talking	to	your	 friend	when	we	were	at	the	amusement	park.

Then	there	was	your	reaction	to	me	when	I	came	out	of	the	haunted	house.”

Dillon	blushed	a	little.

“I	definitely	knew	something	weird	was	going	on	then.	It	wasn’t	like	you	to

act	that	way.	And	when	you	and	Claire	went	to	town	I	tracked	your	phone	and

cross-referenced	it	with	google	maps.	You	were	nowhere	near	the	library.”

“Wow,”	 Dillon	 said,	 impressed	 by	 his	 brothers	 ingenuity.	 “Why	 didn’t	 you tell	Mom	and	Dad?”

Jordan	snorted.	“That’s	not	what	brothers	do	bro.	Besides,	I	figured	you	had

your	reasons	for	sneaking	around.	I	just	didn’t	think	it	was	 this,” he	said	with	a wave	of	the	hand	displaying	their	immediate	surroundings.	“And	…	”	he	started

to	say	with	a	mischievous	smile.

“And	what?”	Dillon	asked.

“And	 there	 might	 be	 a	 time	 in	 the	 future	 when	 I	 need	 a	 favor	 from	 you, which	I	am	sure	you	will	be	more	than	happy	to	help	with	now	that	I	know	your

‘secrets.’”

Dillon	 paused,	 digesting	 what	 his	 brother	 was	 implying.	 He	 realized	 now that,	 despite	 his	 earlier	 heroics,	 Jordan	 was	 still	 the	 same	 old	 Jordan:	 always trying	to	get	something	out	of	him.

“Okay,	okay,	I	get	it,”	he	resigned.	I	just	still	don’t	get	 how	you	got	here?”

“Oh	yeah	…	”	said	Jordan,	almost	as	though	he	had	forgotten	where	he	was

in	 his	 story.	 “So	 because	 I	 knew	 you	 were	 lying	 about	 your’s	 and	 Claire’s excursion	to	town	I	thought	I	would	keep	a	closer	eye	on	you	for	the	next	while; and	 it’s	 a	 good	 thing	 I	 did.	 So	 after	 you	 left	 the	 room	 I	 followed	 you	 to	 your meeting	spot	with	your	friend,	snuck	into	the	back	of	the	car,	and	voila	…	here	I am!”	he	said,	brimming	with	pride.

“But	how	did	you	get	passed	Dad?”	Dillon	asked,	his	curiosity	peaked.

“Well	that	was	the	strange	thing.	I	waited	for	Dad	to	get	in	the	elevator	and

then	 went	 down	 the	 staircase	 on	 the	 opposite	 end	 of	 the	 hallway	 because	 I thought	that’s	the	one	you	took.	But	when	I	got	to	the	side	door	and	outside	the hotel	I	didn’t	see	you	anywhere.	I	honestly	didn’t	think	you	would	try	to	sneak

out	through	the	lobby!”

Dillon	blushed,	remembering	his	lack	of	reconnoissance	which	forced	him	to

go	through	the	lobby.

“I	was	about	to	head	back	inside,	thinking	that	I	missed	you	when	I	saw	you

head	down	the	street	through	the	crowd	and	into	the	tree	line,”	Jordan	continued.

“I	followed	you	through	the	trees,	around	the	guard	house	and,	when	you	were

having	a	conversation	with	your	friend	up	there,	I	snuck	into	the	back	of	the	car.

”

“Wow,”	 Dillon	 said	 again.	 “That’s	 quite	 the	 story.	 I	 didn’t	 think	 you	 were that	observant,”	he	said	with	a	smirk.	“You’ve	really	impressed	me	big	bro.”

“Ya,	I’ve	been	known	to	surprise	people	from	time	to	time.	Not	just	a	dumb

teenager	am	I?”	he	said	with	a	smile.

Before	Dillon	could	respond	Jordan’s	face	suddenly	took	on	a	deadly	serious

demeanour.	 “That’s	 not	 the	 most	 interesting	 part	 of	 the	 story	 though,”	 he	 said, looking	Dillon	in	the	eyes.	“Just	before	I	managed	to	get	to	the	door,	while	I	was still	climbing	out	of	the	car,	I	saw	a	van	pull	up	in	front.”	Dillon’s	heart	skipped a	beat.	“Before	I	knew	what	was	going	on,	someone	got	out	and	opened	the	back

door	 to	 the	 van	 and	 out	 came	 that	 snake-thing	 from	 upstairs.	 Thankfully, whoever	 that	 was,	 didn’t	 see	 me.	 He	 opened	 the	 door	 to	 the	 center	 and	 let	 the creature	 inside,	 then	 went	 back	 and	 sat	 in	 the	 van.	 I	 texted	 you	 to	 get	 out	 of there,	but	you	didn’t	respond.”

Dillon	pulled	out	his	phone,	but	the	battery	was	dead.	“I	guess	I	missed	it."

Dillon	shuddered	as	he	thought	about	the	creature	again,	and	how	Derek	was

still	 up	 there	 with	 it.	 “How	 did	 you	 get	 in	 here	 then	 with	 the	 van	 out	 front?”

Dillon	asked.

“As	 soon	 as	 he	 went	 back	 into	 the	 van	 I	 got	 out	 of	 the	 car	 and	 snuck	 up beside	 it.	 I	 got	 a	 glimpse	 of	 his	 reflection	 from	 the	 mirror	 and	 noticed	 that	 he was	preoccupied	with	looking	at	an	iPad	or	something.	I	figured	that	he	was	too

busy	to	notice	me	so	I	rushed	inside	as	quickly	and	quietly	as	possible.	I	heard the	commotion	in	the	back	room	as	soon	as	I	got	inside	and	ran	there	as	fast	as	I could—and	it’s	a	good	thing	I	did!”

“I’ll	say,”	Dillon	agreed.	“I’d	be	snake	chow	right	now	if	you	hadn’t	gotten

here	when	you	did.”

At	 this	 point	 Dillon	 knew	 it	 would	 be	 wise	 not	 to	 tell	 Jordan	 about	 his dreams,	even	though	they	seemed	to	be	living	one	of	those	right	now.

They	 both	 looked	 around	 trying	 to	 take	 in	 their	 surroundings	 for	 the	 first time	 since	 they	 came	 crashing	 down	 the	 stairs.	 They	 appeared	 to	 be	 in	 a naturally	shaped	cave.	The	room	was	squarish	with	a	tall	ceiling	that	was	about

ten	 feet	 high.	 They	 could	 only	 make	 out	 a	 little	 of	 what	 they	 saw	 from	 the strangely	glowing	fungi	that	clung	to	the	ceiling	and	walls.	The	absolute	silence of	the	place	was	eery.

Dillon	reached	in	the	backpack	and	pulled	out	the	flashlight.	As	he	shone	it

around	the	room	he	just	knew	that	this	was	the	very	same	place	he	had	seen	in

his	dreams.

“Okay.	 There	 should	 be	 another	 hall,	 tunnel,	 or	 something	 like	 that	 out	 of this	room	over	here,”	Dillon	said	as	he	flashed	the	light	in	the	direction,	walked passed	his	brother,	and	headed	to	the	other	side	of	the	chamber.

“Right—your	‘special	ability’	told	you	that,”	mocked	Jordan.	As	he	followed

he	pulled	out	his	phone	thinking	to	see	if	he	had	any	bars	and	also	to	engage	his flashlight	function.

“That	won’t	work,”	Dillon	said	as	he	noticed	what	Jordan	was	trying	to	do.

“What—”	he	started	to	respond	then	noticed	that	his	battery	was	dead.	“How

did	you	know	that?”

“Lucky	 guess,”	 Dillon	 replied.	 Jordan	 stowed	 his	 phone	 again	 and	 came	 to stand	 beside	 his	 brother.	 Dillon	 found	 the	 tunnel	 he	 was	 talking	 about	 without any	 issues,	 but	 before	 they	 entered	 it	 he	 quickly	 went	 over	 to	 the	 far	 wall	 and shined	 his	 light	 right	 where	 he	 knew	 the	 symbol	 on	 the	 wall	 would	 be.	 Sure enough	 it	 was	 there.	 The	 back	 of	 the	 hairs	 on	 Dillon’s	 neck	 stuck	 out	 and	 a shiver	went	down	his	spine.

Jordan	looked	to	the	symbol	then	back	to	Dillon.	“What	is	it?”	he	asked.

“I	 don’t	 know.	 It	 keeps	 showing	 up	 so	 I	 can’t	 help	 but	 think	 that	 it’s important	somehow.”	Dillon	noticed	that	the	writing	he	saw	around	the	symbol

in	his	dream	was	missing	again.

Jordan	was	quiet	as	Dillon	pondered	its	meaning	for	a	moment.

“Okay	we	should	get	going,”	Dillon	finally	said	after	trying	to	process	what was	happening	to	him.	He	was	scared.	But	he	knew	he	had	to	stay	strong	and	see

this	through.	He	wondered	why	he	was	only	able	to	get	glimpses	of	some	of	the

events	 in	 his	 dream,	 and	 whether	 or	 not	 they	 were	 actually	 future	 events,	 like some	 sort	 of	 premonition,	 or	 if	 it	 was	 all	 just	 a	 coincidence.	 Something	 was unnerving	here.	He	also	wondered	if	Gwen	would	fit	into	all	of	this?	Maybe	his

dreams	 were	 only	 images	 of	 what	 might	 happen,	 not	 necessarily	 what	 will happen?

Before	they	went	into	the	tunnel	he	gave	Jordan	the	flashlight	and	took	out	a

torch	and	lighter.	Dillon	dug	around	for	a	moment	and	produced	a	small	bottle	of something	that	was	in	the	bag.	It	was	marked	“oil.”	He	unstoppered	it	and	put	a

bit	 of	 the	 oil	 on	 the	 cloth	 that	 was	 entwined	 on	 the	 end	 of	 the	 torch.	 Then	 he sparked	 the	 lighter	 and	 lit	 it	 up.	 It	 was	 surprisingly	 bright	 for	 an	 old	 fashioned tool.

“Who	 uses	 torches	 nowadays!”	 Jordan	 exclaimed	 as	 the	 dry	 stick	 came	 to life.

“Someone	 who	 knows	 that	 electronics	 aren’t	 going	 to	 be	 very	 useful	 down here,”	 Dillon	 answered,	 as	 he	 pulled	 out	 a	 hunting	 knife	 from	 the	 bag	 before slinging	it	back	on	his	shoulders	again.	He	reached	into	his	pocket	and	produced the	 makeshift	 compass.	 The	 arrowhead	 needle	 was	 stuck	 in	 a	 constant	 state	 of spin.

“Where’d	you	get	that?”	Jordan	asked,	bending	lower	to	get	a	better	look	at

it.

“It	 used	 to	 be	 John	 Taylor	 Sebastian’s.	 Dillon	 examined	 it	 more.	 I	 think	 he has	it	somehow	locked	on	locating	the	specific	magnetism	that’s	in	these	rocks.

I’m	not	sure	how	it	works,	but	because	of	this	little	watch	we	were	able	to	find this	 place.	 Unfortunately,	 I	 don’t	 think	 it’s	 going	 to	 be	 of	 any	 more	 help	 down here.”	Dillon	held	it	up	for	his	brother	to	see	more	clearly.	Jordan	watched	as	the compass	spun	and	spun	and	spun.

“I	 guess	 everything	 down	 here	 is	 radiating	 that	 stuff,”	 Jordan	 concluded.

Dillon	nodded.

“Come	 on,	 we	 have	 to	 keep	 moving,”	 Dillon	 said	 as	 he	 started	 down	 the

passage.	He	suddenly	stopped	after	a	few	steps	and	looked	back	at	Jordan.	“And just	 so	 you	 know,	 there	 are	 creatures	 down	 here	 too,”	 he	 said	 cryptically	 as	 he handed	his	brother	the	knife	he	pulled	from	the	bag.

Jordan	 stared	 at	 Dillon	 with	 a	 stunned	 expression	 and	 his	 body	 visibly shuddered.	He	grabbed	the	knife	and	nodded	grimly	as	he	followed	his	brother

into	the	darkness.





22

S P I D E R S

The	only	thing	that	the	two	brothers	could	hear	as	they	walked	slowly

down	 the	 passageway	 was	 the	 sound	 of	 their	 own	 steps,	 and	 the

crackle	 of	 the	 torch	 as	 the	 flame	 burned	 on.	 Dillon	 waved	 the	 torch

from	side	to	side	as	he	walked,	trying	to	illuminate	the	long	tunnel	as	much	as	he could.	 Jordan	 also	 moved	 the	 flashlight	 around	 trying	 to	 get	 better	 views	 as	 he went.	After	about	twenty	feet	into	the	tunnel	they	came	to	an	intersection.

“Which	way	now	Genius?”	Jordan	asked.

Dillon	 moved	 the	 torch	 to	 the	 left	 passage	 then	 to	 right	 passage.	 He	 was about	to	move	the	torch	back	to	the	left	when	something	caught	his	eye	on	the

wall.	 There	 appeared	 to	 be	 an	 arrow	 chalked	 onto	 the	 wall	 pointing	 down	 that passage.	 He	 looked	 back	 to	 his	 brother	 who	 was	 now	 standing	 beside	 him, equally	curious	about	the	marking.

“Who	do	you	suppose	made	that?”	Jordan	asked.

“I	 don’t	 know,”	 Dillon	 replied.	 “But	 I	 know	 one	 thing	 for	 sure,	 it	 wasn’t John.”

“Why	do	you	say	that?”

“Well	let’s	think	about	it	for	a	moment,”	Dillon	responded.	“John	had	packed

this	bag	that	we	have	so	he	could	come	and	investigate	this	place,	but	he	left	it	in his	room.	He	even	sent	the	watch	and	arrowhead	away	from	here	to	someone	at

The	Orion	Group	probably	in	the	hopes	that	if	something	happened	to	him	they

would	be	able	to	use	it	to	find	him,	which	we	have.”	Dillon	shook	his	head.	“No.

I	 don’t	 think	 John	 ever	 made	 it	 down	 here.	 I	 think	 he	 knew	 that	 someone	 was onto	him,	but	didn’t	have	time	to	get	out	before	they	grabbed	him.”

“Then	 why	 do	 you	 think	 he’s	 down	 here?”	 Jordan	 asked,	 trying	 to	 follow Dillon’s	logic.

“That’s	the	thing.	I’m	not	sure	if	he	is	or	isn’t,”	Dillon	said.	“Derek	seems	to think	that	whoever	took	John	still	has	him	alive.	I’m	not	sure	what	he	bases	that on	as	he	didn’t	provide	any	information	that	would	lead	me	to	believe	that.”

“So	 we’re	 just	 following	 the	 blind	 hunches	 of	 a	 stranger?”	 Jordan’s	 anger was	now	evident.

“Shhhh!	 Remember	 what	 I	 told	 you	 about	 possible	 creatures	 being	 down

here?”	 Dillon	 reprimanded.	 “Anyway,	 we’ll	 never	 know	 for	 sure	 unless	 we continue	on.”

“Whoa!	Little	bro.	The	only	thing	I	want	to	do	is	find	the	way	out	before	we

get	killed	or	eaten	or	both.	Or	be	killed	 by	 being	eaten!”	Jordan	said	as	he	waved the	point	of	the	knife	he	was	carrying	in	Dillon’s	direction.

“Yes,	but	the	only	way	we	know	for	sure	how	to	get	out	of	here	is	back	the

way	we	came	where	that,	whatever-it-was,	was	trying	to	kill	us!	Going	forward

is	our	only	option	Jordan.”

Jordan	thought	for	a	moment,	contemplating	their	situation.	“Fine,”	he	said

at	length.	“Lead	on.”

Dillon	 nodded	 and	 continued	 down	 the	 passageway.	 They	 went	 another

twenty	feet	or	so	and	came	to	another	intersection	and	saw	another	one	of	those

arrow	 markings	 leading	 down	 the	 left	 one	 this	 time.	 Dillon	 moved	 down	 that passage	 without	 saying	 a	 word	 as	 Jordan	 followed.	 Then	 they	 saw	 another intersection	 with	 an	 arrow	 marking	 leading	 down	 the	 right	 passage	 this	 time.

“This	has	to	be	marked	out	for	whoever	it	is	that	works	down	here	so	they	don’t

get	lost,”	Dillon	said	as	he	worked	out	the	logic	in	his	head.

“You’re	 probably	 right,”	 Jordan	 replied.	 “I	 can’t	 think	 of	 any	 other	 reason why	these	are	here.	Can	you?”

Dillon	looked	at	him	and	shook	his	head.

“Great!	So	if	we	follow	these	we	run	into	bad	guys!”

Jordan’s	 exclamation	 sent	 a	 chill	 down	 Dillon’s	 back.	 If	 he	 was	 right,	 then

they	 were	 heading	 somewhere	 that	 didn’t	 have	 good	 prospects	 for	 their continued	health.	On	the	other	hand,	they	would	probably	find	John.

Not	too	much	further	down	the	passage,	as	the	light	illuminated	to	the	extent

of	its	reach	they	noticed	that	there	was	a	split	in	the	tunnel	which	branched	into two	 again.	 They	 also	 noticed	 that	 something,	 or	 someone,	 was	 lying	 on	 the ground	 right	 at	 the	 intersection.	 They	 slowed	 their	 pace	 not	 knowing	 what	 to expect.	 As	 they	 got	 closer	 Dillon	 recognized	 the	 clothes	 that	 the	 person	 was wearing.

“Gwen!”	 he	 yelled	 as	 he	 broke	 into	 a	 run,	 closing	 the	 gap	 quickly	 between him	 and	 his	 sister.	 He	 reached	 her	 and	 knelt	 beside	 her,	 touching	 her	 shoulder and	trying	to	rouse	her.	She	groaned	as	he	did	so.	Jordan	also	ran	up	and	knelt

beside	their	sister.

After	 a	 few	 seconds	 Gwen’s	 eyes	 fluttered	 open.	 She	 smiled	 weakly	 as	 she noticed	 Dillon	 and	 Jordan.	 “Wha—”	 she	 tried	 to	 speak	 but	 the	 words	 wouldn’t come.	She	appeared	so	groggy.

“Don’t	try	to	speak	yet	Gwen,”	advised	Jordan	as	he	rubbed	his	hand	on	her

head.	He	looked	at	Dillon,	concern	in	his	eyes.

“Why	would	she	be	here?”	Jordan	whispered	to	his	brother.

All	Dillon	could	do	was	shrug.	He	saw	her	in	his	dream	but	didn’t	think	she

would	actually	be	down	here.	As	he	and	Jordan	were	moving	through	the	tunnel

he	actually	began	to	believe	that	maybe	his	dream	was	wrong;	maybe	it	was	only

giving	him	generalities	of	what	was	happening,	or	could	potentially	happen.	In

truth,	 the	 dreams	 already	 differed	 a	 little	 from	 what	 he	 actually	 experienced	 to this	point;	most	notably	was	the	missing	details	of	his	and	Jordan’s	conversation.

That	 dream	 wasn’t	 that	 specific;	 it	 was	 more	 like	 faded	 snippets	 of	 the	 general event.

This	much	was	true	now	though,	the	important	details	of	their	current	events

had	come	to	pass.	Suddenly	Dillon	cocked	his	head	up.

“What?”	Jordan	asked	in	surprise.

“We	need	to	go,”	Dillon	responded	sharply.	“We	need	to	go	now!”

Jordan’s	face	went	suddenly	serious.	“Okay,”	he	said	as	he	reached	his	arms

around	Gwen	and	hoisted	her	up.	“Come	on	Gwen.	It’s	time	to	go.”

She	nodded	weakly,	but	was	able	to	stand	with	the	boy’s	help.

“Which	way?”	Jordan	asked.

Dillon	shone	his	light	between	the	two	passages	and	noted	that	there	was	an

arrow	etching	on	the	passage	to	the	right	pointing	that	way.	“This	way.”

“Wait	a	minute	Dillon,”	Jordan	cut	in,	grabbing	his	arm.	“Didn’t	you	say	that

these	 were	 probably	 made	 by	 someone—probably	 the	 bad	 guys—who	 worked

down	 here?	 Probably	 someone	 who	 would	 most	 likely	 kill	 us	 if	 they	 got	 the chance?	I	don’t	know	about	you,	but	what	I’ve	experienced	so	far	in	dealing	with these	people,	whoever	they	are,	is	that	I	really	don’t	want	to	meet	them.	We	are probably	 walking	 into	 their	 secret	 lair	 or	 something.	 And	 no	 one	 likes	 it	 when you	 just	 waltz	 into	 their	 secret	 lair!	 So	 if	 we	 can	 go	 another	 way	 that	 maybe leads	out	without	meeting	up	with	them,	then	I	think	that’s	a	better	option.”

Dillon	couldn’t	refuse	his	logic.	It	was	clear	that,	if	John	was	alive,	he	would be	 down	 here	 with	 these	 guys.	 It	 was	 also	 clear	 that	 these	 people	 weren’t friendly.	Dillon	was	starting	to	agree	with	his	brother	about	not	wanting	to	meet any	 of	 them	 anytime	 soon,	 even	 if	 he	 had	 to	 abandon	 his	 quest	 to	 find	 John.

Seeing	 Gwen	 down	 here	 made	 him	 desire	 nothing	 more	 than	 to	 get	 out—and fast!

“Alright,”	he	said	as	he	started	walking	down	the	passage	to	the	left.	Before

going	 too	 far	 he	 stopped	 and	 looked	 at	 Jordan.	 “Give	 me	 your	 knife	 for	 a second.”

“What	for?”

“Let’s	make	our	own	marks,	just	in	case.”

Jordan	got	what	he	was	saying	and	scraped	an	X	in	the	side	of	the	tunnel.	It

wasn’t	as	noticeable	as	the	arrows	were,	but	it	would	at	least	be	noticed	by	them if	they	had	to	come	back	this	way.

After	Jordan	was	finished,	and	they	began	moving	again,	he	couldn’t	shake

the	 images	 of	 the	 spider-like	 creatures	 he	 saw	 in	 his	 dream,	 or	 the	 jump	 they were	 forced	 to	 take	 off	 the	 cliff.	 He	 couldn’t	 help	 but	 think—and	 hope—that these	 events	 could	 be	 altered	 somehow,	 but	 he	 wasn’t	 sure.	 In	 fact,	 he	 wasn’t confident	of	anything	anymore.	The	dreams	had	come	true	to	a	point.	The	only

difference	was	that	Jordan	and	Gwen	were	in	the	dreams	but	never	together.	This

puzzled	Dillon	more	than	a	little,	but	it	also	gave	him	hope	that	maybe	he	could somehow	change	the	outcome	of	what	was	about	to	happen.

As	 his	 mind	 whirred	 with	 these	 confusing	 thoughts	 something	 on	 the	 wall caught	his	attention.	It	was	the	symbol!

“Oh	no,”	he	blurted.

“What?”	Jordan	asked	in	a	panicked	tone.

“Watch	out	behind	you!”	Dillon	yelled	as	he	pushed	Jordan	and	Gwen	aside

just	in	time	to	see	a	giant	spider-like	creature	with	two	large	glowing	yellow	eyes emerge	from	the	darkness.

Jordan	 and	 Gwen	 stumbled	 into	 the	 wall	 as	 Dillon	 swung	 his	 torch	 at	 the leaping	creature.	The	flaming	stick	hit	the	beast	right	on	one	of	its	bulbous	eyes and	sent	it	flying	to	the	floor.	The	thing	screeched	and	stumbled	around,	trying	to get	up.	Dillon	hit	it	again	and	again	until	thick	black	goo	came	spraying	out	of	it.

It	twitched	a	little	and	then	stopped	moving.	Surprisingly	the	torch	still	held	a	bit of	a	flame,	albeit	less	than	before.

Gwen	broke	into	tears	as	Jordan	grabbed	her	and	pulled	her	away	from	the

thick	hairy	mush	that	was	on	the	tunnel	floor.

“What	was	…	”	Jordan	began	to	say	but	Dillon	put	up	a	hand	to	silence	him.

“Do	you	hear	that?”	he	asked	sharply.

Jordan	 cupped	 Gwen’s	 mouth	 with	 his	 hand	 as	 he	 listened.	 “I	 hear—”	 he began	to	say	when	they	suddenly	saw	it:	dozens	of	yellow	eyes	coming	at	them

from	out	of	the	gloom	through	the	passage	they	just	came	down.	Jordan	shined

his	light	in	that	direction	and,	as	the	creatures	came	into	its	glow,	they	screeched and	slowed,	but	continued	to	advance.

“They	 don’t	 like	 the	 light!”	 Jordan	 yelled	 as	 he	 and	 his	 siblings	 started backing	away.

“Quick	 then!	 We	 need	 to	 move	 further	 down	 the	 tunnel.	 Keep	 shining	 the light	back	there	as	we	run,”	Dillon	instructed	Jordan.

As	 they	 moved,	 one	 of	 the	 creatures	 broke	 free	 from	 the	 pack,	 climbed	 the wall	 and	 scurried	 across	 the	 roof.	 Dillon	 glanced	 back	 just	 in	 time	 to	 see	 it coming	 down	 at	 Jordan.	 Reflexively,	 his	 brother	 shot	 out	 his	 hand	 that	 had	 the knife	and	stabbed	the	creature	right	in	one	of	its	bulging	eyes.	He	was	forced	to

run	backwards	as	he	tried	to	keep	the	light	shining	down	the	passage.	The	thing screeched	and	snapped	at	Jordan	with	its	pincers.	Jordan	hit	it	with	the	flashlight a	couple	of	times	then	quickly	flicked	his	wrist	and	sent	the	beast	sprawling	to the	floor.

Dillon	turned	his	head	again	and	ran	even	faster	with	Gwen	in	tow.

Every	time	he	turned	and	glanced	back	to	see	how	Jordan	was	making	out,

he	noticed	that	more	of	the	creatures	were	trying	to	break	free	of	the	immediate glow	of	the	flashlight.

Dillon	noticed	that	Jordan	was	trying	hard	to	keep	himself	from	stumbling	as

the	 torch	 wasn’t	 putting	 out	 as	 much	 light	 as	 it	 was	 earlier,	 the	 flashlight	 was beginning	to	dim,	and	the	tunnel	in	front	of	them	was	getting	darker.	Thankfully the	light	glow	from	the	fungi	on	the	ceiling	helped	to	illuminate	some	of	the	dark spots.	The	kids	moved	as	fast	as	they	could	but	the	creatures	were	still	gaining on	them.

As	 Dillon	 ran	 he	 started	 to	 hear	 what	 sounded	 like	 a	 waterfall.	 “Great!”	 he said	 out	 loud	 as	 he	 knew	 what	 was	 coming.	 Sure	 enough,	 the	 passage	 led	 out onto	 a	 ledge	 with	 open	 air	 and	 darkness	 before	 them.	 He	 knew	 this	 was	 here because	 of	 his	 dreams,	 but	 the	 dreams	 never	 showed	 him	 whether	 or	 not	 they survive	the	fall.	At	that	moment	the	troubling	thought	hit	him	that	maybe	that’s why	 he	 never	 had	 any	 dreams	 about	 experiences	 that	 stretched	 beyond	 this point?

He	stopped	a	few	feet	before	the	ledge	and	put	his	arm	out	in	order	to	grab

Gwen.	 She	 stopped	 abruptly,	 being	 startled	 when	 Dillon	 grabbed	 her.	 Jordan came	through	last.	He	quickly	came	up	to	them	and	turned	fully	around	to	face

the	tunnel	they	had	just	come	through.	He	was	out	of	breath—they	all	were.

Dillon	turned	to	see	that	the	creatures	had	started	to	make	their	way	onto	the

ledge.	They	slowed	and	started	to	fan	out	as	if	to	corner	their	prey.

“What’s	the	call	little	bro?”	Jordan	asked	between	gasps.

Dillon	 shook	 his	 head	 in	 disbelief.	 “There’s	 only	 one	 thing	 we	 can	 do,”	 he replied	 as	 he	 grabbed	 Gwen,	 looked	 at	 Jordan	 for	 a	 moment,	 and	 then	 leaped from	the	ledge	and	into	the	darkness.	Gwen	let	out	a	shriek	of	surprise	as	her	and Dillon	fell	from	view.



JORDAN	 WATCHED	 IN	 HORROR	 AS	 HIS	 BROTHER	 AND	 SISTER	 PLUNGED	 INTO	 THE

gloom.	He	looked	back	at	the	creatures	who	snapped	at	him	with	their	pincers	as

they	stalked	in.	His	heart	pounded	in	his	chest,	and	his	breathing	came	in	quick gasps	as	his	lungs	tried	to	pull	in	the	much	needed	air.

He	 waved	 the	 flashlight	 around	 menacingly	 trying	 to	 keep	 the	 creatures	 at bay.	 One	 of	 them	 broke	 free	 from	 the	 pack	 and	 leaped	 at	 him.	 Reflexively	 he swung	the	flashlight	and	batted	the	thing	as	hard	as	he	could	on	its	bulbous	body which	 sent	 it	 flying	 over	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 cliff.	 Its	 squeal	 was	 horrifying	 as	 it plunged	into	the	darkness.

Before	 anymore	 could	 attempt	 to	 strike	 a	 killing	 blow	 at	 their	 prey	 Jordan turned	and	leaped	from	the	ledge.





23

T H E 	 L A B

Dillon	could	feel	the	rush	of	the	cool	air	as	he	and	Gwen	plummeted

into	the	dark.	Despite	having	to	hang	onto	his	little	sister	he	somehow

managed	 to	 keep	 hold	 of	 the	 torch	 with	 his	 other	 hand.	 The	 flame

whipped	wildly	in	the	air	but	refused	to	extinguish.

Gwen	 continued	 to	 scream	 as	 they	 fell.	 Dillon’s	 heart	 pounded,	 and	 his stomach	felt	as	though	it	was	stuck	in	his	throat.	He	tried	to	look	down	to	see	if the	light	illuminated	enough	of	their	fall	in	order	to	get	a	glimpse	of	what	was coming,	but	tears	streamed	from	his	eyes	which	made	it	impossible	to	tell.	Then

he	felt	it:	the	cold	rush	of	water	encompass	his	body.	The	torch	went	out.	Dillon instinctively	let	go	of	his	sister	and	torch	as	he	tried	frantically	to	surface.	As	his head	 popped	 out	 of	 the	 water	 his	 lungs	 forced	 him	 to	 take	 in	 a	 deep	 breath.	 A moment	 later	 Gwen	 came	 up,	 gasping	 for	 air.	 Dillon	 quickly	 swam	 over	 and grabbed	 her	 just	 under	 the	 arms.	 Gwen	 kick	 and	 thrashed	 about	 wildly.	 Dillon did	everything	he	could	to	hold	on	without	both	of	them	going	under.

“Gwen!”	 he	 yelled,	 trying	 to	 get	 her	 attention.	 “Gwen,	 it’s	 okay.	 I’ve	 got you,”	he	said,	this	time	in	a	calmer	voice.	“It’s	okay.	It’s	okay.”

After	a	moment	he	managed	to	calm	her	down	as	he	swam	them	both	to	the

side.	 He	 wasn’t	 sure	 if	 Jordan	 was	 coming.	 He	 hoped	 that	 Jordan	 was	 coming.

But	he	didn’t	want	to	be	in	the	way	of	him	landing	in	the	water.

As	he	swam	he	looked	around	and	noticed	that	the	room	they	were	in	seemed

to	be	lit	up	by	that	same	glowing	substance	they	had	seen	earlier.	About	a	dozen

feet	or	so	from	where	they	were	was	a	ledge	that	opened	up	onto	solid	ground.	It looked	like	an	open	room	as	Dillon	could	make	out	in	the	dim	glow	a	door	at	the

far	 end.	 His	 mind	 had	 trouble	 processing	 it	 as	 it	 seemed	 out	 of	 place	 from	 the rest	 of	 the	 tunnels	 they	 had	 been	 through,	 and	 this	 underground	 cavern	 and waterway.

As	he	swam	harder	in	an	effort	to	get	him	and	Gwen	to	the	shore	he	noticed	a

light	 from	 above	 swirling	 around	 in	 all	 directions	 and	 coming	 in	 fast.	 Jordan’s screams	could	be	 heard	echoing	around	 as	he	descended	 rapidly.	Dillon	kicked

even	harder,	trying	to	put	more	distance	between	Jordan	and	themselves.	Jordan

hit	 the	 water—waves	 exploding	 all	 around	 from	 the	 impact.	 Dillon	 and	 Gwen got	 hit	 by	 the	 wave.	 It	 drenched	 them	 all	 over	 again,	 but	 the	 impact	 helped	 to propel	them	closer	to	the	shore.

“We’re	over	here!”	Dillon	hollered	as	soon	as	he	noticed	Jordan	surface.	His

legs	felt	as	though	they	were	about	to	give	out,	but	as	he	reached	back	with	his hand	he	felt	the	edge	of	the	shoreline.

With	as	much	energy	as	he	could	muster	he	pulled	Gwen	closer	to	the	solid

ground.	“Here	Gwen.	Grab	onto	this,”	he	said	through	gritted	teeth.

Once	they	were	out	of	the	water	they	flopped	over	onto	their	backs	and	lay

there,	trying	to	catch	their	breaths.	A	moment	later	Jordan	joined	them.

“Well	…	that	was	…	fun,”	Jordan	said	between	gasps	of	breath.

Dillon	got	up,	took	his	pack	off,	and	slung	it	to	the	side	before	flopping	back

down	again.

Another	long	moment	went	by	before	they	heard	Gwen	say,	“I’m	cold.”

Jordan	quickly	moved	up	close	beside	her	and	wrapped	her	in	a	big	hug.	“It’s

okay,”	 he	 said	 reassuringly.	 “It’s	 actually	 not	 that	 cold	 down	 here.”	 By	 saying that	he	was	telling	the	truth.	In	fact,	the	temperature	down	there	was	quite	warm.

“Trust	me.	You’ll	warm	up	right	away.”

Dillon	 grabbed	 his	 pack	 again	 as	 he	 rose	 to	 his	 feet.	 “I	 don’t	 suppose	 that flashlight	still	works?”	he	asked	his	brother.

Surprisingly,	Jordan	still	had	it	in	his	grasp	but	the	light	was	out.	He	shook	it a	few	times	and	water	came	pouring	out	of	it.	“Nope,”	he	replied.

Dillon	looked	around.	They	were	in	some	sort	of	square	room	that	appeared

to	 be	 manmade.	 The	 walls	 and	 floors	 were	 made	 from	 the	 same	 natural	 stone that	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 place	 was,	 but	 there	 were	 light	 fixtures	 and	 other	 pipes running	 along	 the	 ceiling.	 There	 were	 also	 old	 racks	 and	 a	 couple	 of	 broken tables	and	chairs	scattered	throughout.

“Obviously	 there	 used	 to	 be	 people	 down	 here	 doing	 who	 knows	 what,”

Dillon	stated	as	he	walked	to	the	other	side	of	the	room.	He	found	a	light	switch beside	 the	 door	 and	 flicked	 it	 on.	 Some	 of	 the	 fixtures	 flickered	 to	 life	 while others	remained	out	and	one	even	had	a	light	bulb	explode.	The	kids	jumped	as

they	were	startled	by	the	sudden	explosion.

“Do	you	think	it’s	wise	turning	that	on?”	Jordan	whispered	loudly	to	Dillon.

His	brother	merely	shrugged.	“Too	late	now.”

The	door	had	a	large	coating	of	dust	and	cobwebs	on	it	which	made	it	look	as

though	it	hadn’t	been	opened	in	a	long	time.	The	top	portion	had	a	large	window

in	 it	 that	 was	 equally	 coated	 with	 thick	 dust.	 Dillon	 swiped	 his	 hand	 across	 it making	a	large	clear	spot,	disturbing	the	dust	which	floated	into	the	air	causing him	 to	 cough.	 The	 window	 looked	 as	 though	 it	 was	 naturally	 fogged	 which would	 allow	 light	 to	 come	 in	 and	 exit,	 but	 would	 prevent	 anyone	 from	 seeing exactly	what	was	happening	on	one	side	or	the	other.	Through	the	clear	spot	that Dillon	had	made	the	kids	could	see	a	little	bit	of	light	on	the	other	side.	The	light appeared	to	be	far	away	or	faded	somehow.

“There’s	gotta	be	someone	down	there,”	Jordan	observed.

“I	guess	there’s	only	one	way	to	find	out,”	Dillon	said	as	he	reached	for	the

door	 handle.	 The	 door	 seemed	 like	 it	 was	 welded	 in	 place.	 Dillon	 tugged	 and reefed	on	the	door	with	all	his	might	but	it	wouldn’t	budge.	Jordan	moved	him

aside	and	pushed	on	the	door—even	giving	it	a	quick	shot	with	his	shoulder—

and	it	swung	open.	He	waved	for	Dillon	to	go	first,	giving	him	a	knowing	smirk.

Dillon	just	shook	his	head	as	he	walked	through.	Gwen	giggled	at	her	brother’s

playful	silent	banter.

The	 hallway	 on	 the	 other	 side	 appeared	 to	 be	 more	 constructed	 than	 the natural	stone	look	of	the	room	they	just	came	through.	It	was	almost	as	though

they	had	entered	a	hospital—an	old	hospital—with	the	design	of	the	tiled	floor,

walls	that	appeared	to	be	drywalled,	and	false	ceiling	that	most	likely	concealed

water	pipes	and	electrical	wiring.

It	 was	 a	 long	 hallway	 and	 the	 kids	 could	 see	 light	 shinning	 through	 from probably	another	room	at	the	end.	Dillon	and	Jordan	looked	at	each	other	for	a

moment—both	sharing	silent	concerns—before	continuing.	Gwen	took	a	hold	of

a	 hand	 from	 each	 of	 her	 brothers.	 Dillon	 saw	 a	 light	 switch	 on	 the	 wall	 and moved	to	flick	it	on,	but	before	he	got	there	Jordan	grabbed	his	arm	and	shook

his	head.	Dillon	withdrew,	understanding	Jordan’s	reasoning.

The	 kids	 crept	 down	 the	 hall	 as	 quietly	 as	 they	 could;	 their	 nerves	 were strung	out	as	taut	as	they	could	go.	They	looked	around	anxiously,	hoping	not	to encounter	any	more	creatures	which	might	be	lurking	in	the	darkness.

As	they	got	closer	to	the	end	of	the	hallway	they	could	hear	the	low	hum	of

electricity	 and	 a	 few	 other	 faint	 sounds	 that	 couldn’t	 quite	 be	 discerned.	 They stopped	about	ten	feet	short.

“Okay,	you	stay	here	Gwen,”	Jordan	stated	as	he	let	go	of	her	and	moved	her

gently	against	the	wall.

“We	just	need	to	take	a	peek,”	Dillon	reassured.

Gwen	was	not	happy	about	it,	but	complied	anyway.

Dillon	 and	 Jordan	 inched	 closer	 to	 the	 opening.	 All	 they	 could	 see	 at	 this point	 was	 some	 shelving	 units	 with	 a	 bunch	 of	 what	 appeared	 to	 be	 glass	 jars with	 various	 colors	 of	 liquids	 in	 them.	 The	 jars	 all	 seemed	 to	 have	 labels	 on them,	 but	 from	 this	 distance	 the	 two	 brothers	 couldn’t	 make	 out	 any	 of	 the writing.

When	they	got	right	to	the	edge	they	stopped	and	listened	intently,	hoping	to

make	out	whether	or	not	someone	was	in	the	room.	They	couldn’t	tell	with	the

hum	of	electricity.	Dillon	finally	made	the	decision	to	peek	his	head	around	the corner	and	see	what	was	going	on	in	there.

He	slowly	poked	his	head	out	and	surveyed	the	whole	scope	of	the	room.	It

appeared	 to	 be	 some	 sort	 of	 lab.	 There	 were	 beakers	 of	 fluidic	 substances	 in what	appeared	to	be	processing	equipment.	Some	were	being	heated	and	others

mixed.	 There	 were	 a	 number	 of	 computer	 terminals	 scattered	 throughout	 the room	on	desks	and	tables.

Dillon	 didn’t	 see	 anyone	 right	 away	 so	 he	 crept	 inside,	 trying	 to	 keep	 a

watchful	eye.	Jordan	grabbed	his	arm.	“Are	you	sure	this	is	smart?”	he	asked.

“How	else	are	we	gonna	get	outta	here?”	he	replied.

The	 logic	 must	 have	 hit	 Jordan	 right	 away	 as	 he	 released	 his	 arm	 and nodded.

The	first	thing	Dillon	noticed	was	that	this	room	seemed	to	be	kept	in	better

shape	 than	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 places	 they	 had	 been	 so	 far.	 There	 was	 a	 door	 to	 the side	 that	 was	 marked	 with	 the	 distinctive	 “Restroom”	 sign	 on	 it,	 and	 at	 the	 far end	there	was	another	door	that	was	shut.

As	he	started	to	go	through	the	room—Jordan	right	behind	him—he	noticed,

as	he	moved	around	some	of	the	shelves,	that	there	were	cages	lined	up	on	one

of	the	walls	which	contained	various	types	of	animals:	snakes,	cats,	coyotes,	rats, and	 even	 a	 goat.	 Dillon	 went	 over	 to	 where	 they	 were	 and	 found	 that	 they	 all seemed	to	be	sedated.

“This	place	is	starting	to	give	me	the	creeps,”	whispered	Jordan.

“It’s	just	starting	 now	to	give	you	the	creeps?”	Dillon	asked	sarcastically.

Jordan	 smirked	 and	 shrugged.	 “We	 should	 probably	 see	 where	 that	 other

door	leads	before	someone	finds	us,”	he	said	as	he	started	to	walk	towards	it.

“Just	a	second,”	Dillon	said	as	he	went	to	one	of	the	computer	terminals.	He

picked	up	the	mouse	and	noticed	that	the	laser	on	the	bottom	of	it	was	still	lit	up which	 told	 him	 that	 the	 machine	 was	 still	 on.	 He	 put	 it	 down	 and	 pushed	 the space	 bar	 on	 the	 keyboard.	 The	 screen	 came	 to	 life	 and	 didn’t	 even	 ask	 for	 a password!	 He	 saw	 that	 some	 of	 the	 programs	 where	 still	 open—minimized	 on the	toolbar.	When	he	maximized	one	of	them	he	wasn’t	able	to	make	much	sense

of	 the	 scientific	 mumbo	 jumbo,	 but	 what	 he	 did	 take	 away	 from	 it	 was	 that, whoever	ran	this	lab,	were	producing	something	called	“Genesis”	and	something

called	“Necrotoxin.”

“Necrotoxin,”	he	said	out	loud	as	he	read.

“What?	 You	 mean	 this,”	 Jordan	 said	 as	 he	 held	 up	 a	 syringe	 he	 had	 pulled from	 a	 small	 stand	 that	 was	 on	 one	 of	 the	 racks.	 There	 were	 probably	 a	 dozen such	syringes	on	that	stand,	all	lined	up.

Dillon	walked	over	to	him	and	took	the	syringe.	Sure	enough	it	was	labeled

“Necrotoxin.”

“There	 was	 something	 written	 on	 the	 computer	 that	 says	 this	 stuff	 is	 a byproduct	of	Genesis,”	he	stated	as	he	inspected	it	further.	The	liquid	was	dark, dark	blue	which	made	it	appear	almost	black.	It	reminded	him	of	sludge	or	oil.

“What	about	Genesis?	Did	you	find	any	of	that?”

“What’s	 that?	 Oh	 …	 here	 it	 is,”	 Jordan	 said	 as	 he	 pulled	 another	 syringe filled	with	a	light	blue	liquid	from	a	different	shelf.

Dillon	took	that	one	too.	“These	somehow	counteract	each	other,	but	I’m	not

sure	how.”	he	said	as	he	put	them	in	an	outside	pocket	of	his	backpack.	“We’d

better	take	them	just	in	case.”

“Good	idea.”

Jordan	started	to	look	around	again	and	got	startled	by	Gwen	who	was	right

beside	him.	“Gwen,	I	told	you	to	stay	out	of	the	room	until	Dillon	and	I	said	it was	safe!”	he	scolded.

“I	know.	It’s	just	that	…	I	was	scared	all	by	myself,”	she	whimpered.

“It’s	 okay,”	 said	 Jordan	 as	 he	 patted	 her	 on	 the	 shoulder.	 “It	 looks	 like everything’s	good	right	now.”

Dillon	went	back	to	the	computer	terminal.

“What	are	you	doing?”	Jordan	asked.

Dillon	 was	 silent	 for	 a	 moment	 as	 he	 clicked	 away.	 “Darn!”	 he	 yelled	 as loudly	as	he	dared.

“What?”	Jordan	asked	as	he	moved	over	to	him.

“Oh,	I	just	thought	that	maybe	I’d	be	able	to	send	an	e-mail	to	Mom	and	Dad

letting	them	know	what’s	going	on,	but	this	computer	isn’t	actually	connected	to an	outside	network.	Probably	due	to	the	depth	below	ground	that	we’re	at	and	all the	interference	from	the	rocks.”

“It	was	a	good	thought	anyway,”	Jordan	replied	as	he	patted	his	brother	on

the	shoulder.

Dillon	nodded	and	went	to	the	door	that	was	on	the	other	side	of	the	room.

He	tried	to	look	through	the	fogged	glass	to	see	if	he	could	see	anything	on	the other	side.	It	was	no	use.	The	glass	was	too	clouded.	Jordan	came	over	and	took

a	peek	in	the	window	of	the	door	himself.

“What’s	the	plan?”	he	asked.

Dillon	shrugged.	“I	guess	we	take	our	chances,”	he	replied.

“You	 don’t	 have	 any	 more	 of	 those,	 ‘I	 know	 where	 I’m	 going’	 sort	 of feelings	do	you?”

Dillon	shook	his	head	and	grabbed	the	door	handle.	Suddenly	the	main	lights

went	 low,	 emergency	 lights	 started	 flashing,	 and	 an	 alarm	 started	 to	 blare.	 The boys	covered	their	ears,	trying	to	dampen	the	deafening	wine	of	the	alarm.	They

looked	behind	them	and	saw	Gwen	standing	beside	the	wall	staring	at	them	with

glowing	yellow	eyes!	She	had	the	same	eyes	as	all	those	creatures	they	had	seen

before.	Her	hand	was	still	holding	onto	the	triggered	security	alarm	that	was	on the	wall.

“What	the	…	”	Dillon	spouted.	“What	are	you	doing	Gwen?”	he	yelled.

She	just	stared	at	them	with	those	glowing	eyes—emotionless.

Dillon	 was	 about	 to	 run	 over	 to	 her	 when	 the	 door	 behind	 them	 burst	 open and	men	grabbed	them	and	held	them	fast.	Jordan	and	Dillon	were	thrown	to	the

ground	hard—the	wind	being	blasted	from	their	lungs.	Dillon	saw	someone	walk

over	 beside	 Gwen	 and	 patted	 her	 on	 the	 head.	 He	 couldn’t	 get	 a	 good	 look	 at them	as	he	was	struggling	with	the	man	who	had	put	him	on	the	ground.	All	he

could	hear	was	a	woman	say,	“Good	girl	Gwen.”

He	 and	 Jordan	 were	 then	 picked	 up	 as	 though	 they	 weighed	 nothing.	 The men	twisted	their	arms	around	their	backs	which	elicited	a	grunt	from	each	boy

as	they	were	marched	down	the	hallway.

“Gwen!	Gwen!	What	did	you	do	to	our	sister!”	Dillon	shouted,	trying	to	look

back	to	see	if	he	could	still	see	her.	“Gwen!





24

T H E 	 M O N S T E R

Dillon	and	Jordan	struggled	against	their	captors	to	no	avail	as	they

were	led	down	the	long	hallway.	Their	arms	were	held	tightly	behind

them	by	what	seemed	to	be	an	iron	grip.

“Where’s	 my	 sister!”	 Dillon	 screamed,	 wondering	 what	 they	 had	 done	 to

Gwen	that	made	her	eyes	glow	yellow.	The	image	of	the	coyotes,	rat,	and	snake

came	rushing	to	his	mind	as	he	thought	about	his	sister.

“Don’t	worry,”	came	a	smooth	woman’s	voice	from	behind.	“She’s	right	here

and	doing	just	fine.”

Dillon	knew	he	had	heard	that	voice	before.	It	couldn’t	be!	Images	flashed	in

his	 mind	 from	 a	 few	 days	 back	 when	 he	 had	 rented	 the	 bike	 from	 the	 on-site shop	at	the	resort.	He	was	sure	it	was	the	woman	at	the	desk,	Tara! How	many	of these	 people	 are	 involved	 in	 this? 	 he	 wondered	 to	 himself.	 His	 mind	 whirled with	all	the	possibilities	of	the	different	people	he	met. Could	Janeen	be	a	part of	it	too? 	he	thought.

He	brought	his	focus	back	quickly	as	he	knew	he	would	have	to	find	a	way

out	of	this	if	he	and	his	siblings	had	a	chance	of	surviving.	And	he	had	to	resign to	the	fact	that	he	would	have	to	take	Tara’s	word	that	Gwen	was	fine.

The	hallway	turned	and	then	opened	up	into	another	room.	Dillon	and	Jordan

were	 thrown	 forcefully	 to	 the	 floor.	 As	 they	 began	 to	 rise	 they	 noticed	 some cages	 to	 the	 left	 of	 them	 against	 the	 wall.	 The	 room	 was	 large	 with	 a	 high ceiling.	 It	 resembled	 the	 last	 room	 with	 a	 dozen	 or	 so	 computer	 terminals,

chemistry-type	 equipment	 with	 beakers	 brewing	 an	 assortment	 of	 different colored	 liquids,	 Bunsen	 burners,	 and	 lots	 of	 microscopes	 and	 lab	 hand	 tools strewn	 about	 the	 many	 counters.	 A	 few	 people	 in	 lab	 coats	 appeared	 to	 be	 at work	 at	 the	 various	 stations.	 They	 didn’t	 even	 turn	 to	 acknowledge	 the	 new arrivals.	All	of	them	had	the	same	glowing	eyes	that	Gwen	now	had.

Dillon	looked	to	the	cages	and	noticed	immediately	that	Tom	Tom	was	slunk

down	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 one	 of	 them.	 Next	 to	 his,	 in	 adjoining	 cells,	 were	 a	 few people	 he	 didn’t	 recognize—and	 next	 to	 them	 was	 …	 Derek!	 Dillon’s	 heart skipped	a	beat	when	he	saw	Derek	and	Tom	Tom	still	alive.	Derek	looked	like	he

had	 a	 fight	 with	 a	 bus	 and	 lost	 badly!	 Dillon	 wasn’t	 even	 sure	 if	 he	 was	 still alive.

“But	how?”	he	whispered	to	himself,	unable	to	understand	how	Derek	could

have	 been	 brought	 down	 here	 before	 them,	 unless	 there	 was	 either	 another entrance,	 or	 he	 was	 taken	 down	 the	 direct	 route	 that	 he,	 Jordan,	 and	 Gwen avoided	 after	 they	 found	 Gwen.	 Either	 way,	 he	 was	 just	 happy	 to	 see	 the	 man again.	He	just	hoped	he	was	still	alive.

As	 he	 scanned	 the	 room	 some	 more	 he	 saw,	 standing	 next	 to	 one	 of	 the computer	stations,	a	man	that	looked	familiar.	The	man	turned	to	him,	his	eyes

were	 glowing	 yellow	 just	 like	 Gwen’s.	 Dillon	 flinched	 in	 surprise.	 It	 took	 a second	but	Dillon	finally	recognized	him.	It	was	John!

John	 stared	 at	 him	 for	 a	 moment	 with	 a	 blank,	 yellow-eyed,	 stare	 and	 then went	back	to	work.

“Impressive	isn’t	it?”	he	heard	a	voice	say	that	jolted	him	from	his	shock.

He	 and	 Jordan	 both	 looked	 to	 the	 side	 and	 saw	 a	 man	 coming	 down	 some stairs	 from	 another	 hallway	 at	 that	 side	 of	 the	 room.	 Dillon	 recognized	 him immediately.	 It	 was	 Troy!	 Troy	 smiled	 at	 the	 two	 brothers	 as	 he	 entered	 the room.

“You	know	…	I	never	thought	you	would	make	it	this	far,”	he	said	in	a	tone

that	sounded	almost	impressed.

“So	you’re	the	one	behind	all	this,”	Dillon	accused.

“Wait	 …	 ”	 Jordan	 said	 in	 a	 questioning	 tone.	 “What	 is	 all	 this?”	 he	 asked looking	to	his	brother.	He	glanced	over	at	Troy	as	a	look	of	recognition	played





across	his	face.	“Isn’t	that	the	guy	that	we	met	at	the	front	gate	when	we	came

in?”	Jordan	asked.

Troy	laughed.

“No	offence,”	Jordan	said	cutting	Troy’s	laugh	short.	“But	you’re	not	exactly

intimidating.	You	know	…	‘ The	Gate	Keeper’	and	all.”

Troy	grinned	wickedly	and	nodded	toward	him.	Suddenly	Jordan	was	lifted

off	his	feet.	Dillon	couldn’t	believe	the	ease	at	which	the	guy	who	grabbed	his

brother	hoisted	him	into	the	air.

“Cool	 isn’t	 it?”	 Troy	 commented.	 “It’s	 called	 Centrigenix.	 It’s	 a	 chemical compound	that	affects	the	nervous	and	muscular	system	of	a	person	to	such	an

extent	that	they	are	able	to	perform	extraordinary	feats;	at	least,	that	is,	until	the effects	wear	off	which,	as	we	just	discovered	is	pretty	quick.	But	Rob	there	has enough	 “juice”	 to	 last	 for	 a	 little	 bit	 longer	 I	 think.	 Long	 enough	 to	 show	 you some	manners.”

As	soon	as	he	finished	speaking	Rob	threw	Jordan	into	the	air.

JORDAN’S	 HEART	 POUNDED	 AS	 HE	 FELT	 HIMSELF	 TAKE	 OFF.	 “NOOOOOO!”	 HE

heard	Dillon	scream.	He	closed	his	eyes	as	he	slammed	into	the	steel	bars	of	one of	the	cages.	He	felt	the	wind	being	blown	from	his	lungs	as	he	landed	hard	on

the	floor.	He	writhed	around,	trying	to	get	up.	His	vision	blurred	a	little	but	then came	back	to	normal	a	few	seconds	later.	His	side	and	his	arms	hurt.	He	didn’t

think	 anything	 was	 broken	 but	 couldn’t	 be	 sure.	 He	 looked	 toward	 Dillon	 and Gwen	 and	 saw	 that	 Dillon	 was	 racing	 over	 to	 see	 if	 he	 was	 okay.	 Rob	 and	 the other	guy	that	brought	Dillon	down	the	hallway	moved	as	if	to	go	and	retrieve

him,	but	Troy	put	up	a	hand	to	stop	them.

Dillon	stooped	down.	“Are	you	okay	bro?”	he	asked	urgently.

“Ya,	 I	 think	 so,”	 replied	 Jordan	 with	 a	 wince	 as	 he	 felt	 a	 sharp	 pain	 in	 his side	when	he	spoke.

DILLON	HELPED	JORDAN	TO	HIS	FEET,	THEN	TURNED	BACK	TO	TROY.	“WHAT	DID

you	do	to	my	sister	and	John?”	he	asked	accusingly.

Troy	slowly	walked	over	to	where	Gwen	was	standing	with	the	woman	from

the	bike	shop.	“Oh	she’s	fine,”	he	said.	“We	just	implanted	her	and	John	with	a

neurogenic	transmitter.”

“A	neuro	what?”

“It’s	 for	 mind	 control,”	 he	 heard	 Derek	 say	 in	 a	 weak	 voice	 from	 his	 cell.

“They	implanted	them	with	a	chip	that	makes	them	completely	obedient	to	their

commands.	It	must	be	the	same	chip	you	found	in	the	coyote.”

“But	why?”	Dillon	asked.

“Well	 …	 you	 see,	 John	 and	 his	 team	 are	 the	 scientists	 that	 created	 the original	batch	of	Genesis.”

Dillon	looked	dumbfounded.	“But	John’s	an	archeologist,	not	a	scientist.”

Troy	 laughed.	 “No	 Dillon,	 actually	 he’s	 not.	 You’ve	 been	 fed	 a	 line.	 John was	 sent	 to	 Oasis	 Resort—undercover	 posing	 as	 an	 archeologist—in	 order	 to track	down	the	location	of	the	serum	that	we	stole	a	few	years	ago.	It’s	kind	of funny.	John	did	such	a	good	job	at	playing	the	part,	and	with	the	help	of	Orion

and	 their	 vast	 resources,	 they	 were	 able	 to	 fabricate	 his	 whole	 life	 as	 an archeologist	so	that	no	one	would	suspect	him.”

“If	you	didn’t	want	anyone	finding	Genesis	then	why	would	you	even	let	him

come	here	with	a	team	to	look	for	the	supposed	source	of	the	springs?”	Dillon

asked,	rather	dumbfounded	with	the	whole	situation.

Troy	 laughed	 again.	 “Because,	 over	 the	 years	 we	 have	 allowed	 such

expeditions	to	occur	and	no	one	has	ever	been	able	to	even	come	close	to	what

we’re	 doing	 here.	 We	 have	 hidden	 our	 secrets	 quite	 well.	 The	 problem	 with John,	 is	 that	 he	 was	 the	 creator	 of	 this	 particularly	 helpful	 chemical	 agent,	 and that	 gave	 him	 an	 advantage	 that	 the	 others	 didn’t	 have.	 He	 knew	 its	 chemical makeup	 and	 was	 able	 to	 detect	 traces	 of	 it	 in	 certain	 spots	 around	 the	 resort which	 allowed	 him	 to	 accurately	 estimate	 the	 location	 of	 where	 we	 were dumping	it	into	the	underground	water	supply.	He’s	quite	brilliant	really.”

“So	then	how	did	you	find	out	that	John	wasn’t	who	he	said	he	was?”

Troy	smirked	and	looked	briefly	to	one	of	the	cages.

He	 followed	 Troy’s	 gaze.	 “Tom	 Tom?”	 Dillon	 blurted,	 as	 the	 truth	 dawned on	him.	He	saw	the	broken	man	in	the	cage	slump	a	little	more.

“It’s	not	like	that,”	Tom	Tom	replied	weakly.	“I	didn’t	…	I	never	meant	to	…

”	Tears	streamed	from	the	old	man’s	face.	“He’s	my	friend.”

Dillon	didn’t	know	what	to	think,	and	Troy	seemed	to	be	enjoying	the	drama

as	he	grinned	wickedly.

“After	we	found	out	who	John	really	was	we	figured	that	it	was	only	a	matter

of	time	before	he	discovered	our	secret	and	reported	back	to	The	Orion	Group.”

He	 paused	 for	 a	 moment	 in	 self-reflection.	 “You	 know,	 at	 first	 we	 didn’t	 know that	Orion	was	even	involved	in	this,	but	we	made	preparations	anyway	in	order

to	deal	with	whoever	it	was	once	we	took	John	into	our	care.”

“By	creating	these	monsters?”	Dillon	interjected.

“Yes,	and	we	made	a	few	other	provisions,	but	the	Necrotoxic	creatures	were

definitely	top	of	our	achievement.	You	can	thank	John	for	those.”

Dillon	 swallowed	 hard	 and	 even	 flinched	 a	 little	 at	 the	 mention	 of	 the Necrotoxic	creatures.

“John’s	gifts	of	manipulating	chemical	properties	is	most	useful.”

“I	assume	you	tortured	him	into	telling	you	who	sent	him?”	Derek	accused.

“No	no	no,	nothing	that	crude,”	Troy	replied	calmly.	“We	have	other	ways	of

finding	 out	 the	 information	 we	 need.	 The	 neurogenic	 transmitters	 don’t	 just allow	us	to	control	the	mind,	but	sift	it	as	well.	John’s	knowledge	of	the	science is	extremely	impressive.”

“Do	 you	 know	 why	 it’s	 called	 necrotoxin?”	 he	 continued.	 “Because	 it

actually	kills	the	creature	and	brings	it	back	in	a,	shall	we	say,	more	formidable state.	It	makes	changes	to	their	genetic	code	and	gives	them	features	that	aren’t natural	 to	 them,	 as	 you	 probably	 noticed	 with	 the	 large	 snake	 creature	 that	 had arms,	or	the	coyotes	that	are	larger	than	normal	and	possess	acidic	saliva.	Before we	do	that,	however,	we	make	sure	to	implant	the	neurogenic	transmitter	first	so they	are	perfectly	under	control.”

“But	why	did	you	put	one	of	those	neurogenic	transmitters	in	Gwen?”	Dillon

asked,	almost	shouting	as	his	anger	started	to	surface.

Troy	gave	Dillon	a	dismissive	wave	as	he	walked	over	to	where	Gwen	was.

“It’s	 really	 quite	 simple,”	 he	 stated	 matter-of-factly.	 “It’s	 because	 you	 were starting	to	become	an	annoyance,	and	Orion	kept	a	pretty	close	eye	on	you.	We

figured	 that	 if	 you	 somehow	 managed	 to	 find	 your	 way	 down	 here	 then	 we would	 have	 to	 put	 a	 contingency	 plan	 in	 place	 to	 deal	 with	 it.	 When	 we	 were notified	that	you	were	on	your	way	through	the	information	center,	we	snatched

up	your	sister—after	dealing	with	the	two	Orion	agents	that	were	watching	your

family—and	 put	 her	 in	 the	 tunnel	 and	 programmed	 her	 to	 alert	 us	 of	 your presence	 if	 you	 made	 it	 to	 the	 lab	 facility.	 It	 worked	 pretty	 well	 wouldn’t	 you say?”	he	stated	as	he	patted	Gwen	on	the	head.

“Get	your	hands	off	her	you	jerk!”	Jordan	yelled	through	gritted	teeth.

“Wouldn’t	surveillance	cameras	be	easier	than	using	human	pawns?”	Dillon

asked	in	disgust.

“Ah,	but	that’s	the	problem	with	working	down	here	Dillon.	You	must	have

figured	 that	 out	 by	 now?	 Electronics	 don’t	 function	 the	 same	 close	 to	 these magnetic	rocks	now	do	they?”

“Then	how	are	you	able	to	keep	the	computers	in	the	lab	running?”

Troy	laughed	again.	“Man!	You	are	observant	and	nothing	gets	passed	you,

does	it?	The	computers	are	hooked	up	to	massive	generators	so	we	can	use	them,

and	even	then	we	can	only	operate	for	so	long	until	we	have	to	shut	them	down.

You	might	have	noticed	some	blackout	periods	at	the	resort?”

Dillon	thought	back	and	remembered	a	few	of	the	moments	Troy	was	talking

about.

“Those	 were	 times	 when	 our	 power	 here	 at	 Oasis	 Resort	 was	 taxed	 to	 the max	 and	 couldn’t	 be	 sustained	 because	 of	 all	 of	 this.”	 He	 held	 his	 arms	 open dramatically	as	if	totally	caught	up	in	his	own	genius.

“That’s	 great	 and	 all,”	 Jordan	 interjected.	 “But	 why	 are	 you	 telling	 us	 all this?”

Troy	 turned	 his	 attention	 to	 Dillon.	 “So	 you	 can	 see	 what’s	 already	 being accomplished!	We’re	doing	great	things,	Dillon.	Things	you	could	be	a	part	of.

John’s	 scientific	 genius	 is	 great,	 but	 we	 need	 someone	 who	 can	 spot	 problems and	connections.	Someone	like	you.”

“Well	that’s	 not	going	to	happen!”	Dillon	responded	resolutely.

“I	was	afraid	you	would	say	that,”	Troy	replied	as	he	nodded	to	Rob,	the	man who	had	thrown	Jordan	into	the	air	a	moment	earlier.	“I	guess	we	will	just	have

to	dispose	of	you	and	your	family.	You	know	too	much.”	Rob	smiled	and	started

to	approach	the	two	brothers.

“What	 are	 you	 doing?”	 Derek	 asked	 insistently	 from	 his	 cell.	 “They’re	 just boys!”

“You	 should	 have	 thought	 of	 that	 before	 you	 got	 them	 into	 this,”	 Troy snapped	back.

“Wait	Troy,	that	wasn’t	part	of	the	deal!”	Tara	exclaimed.	“You	said	you	just

wanted	to	capture	the	kids.”

“Sorry	 Tara,	 but	 things	 just	 got	 more	 complicated,”	 replied	 Troy.	 “We	 now have	to	clean	up	this	mess,”	he	stated.	“Try	to	make	it	quick	Rob.	I	can’t	stand	to see	people	suffer.	We’ll	take	care	of	Derek	and	the	others	after.”

“With	pleasure,”	Rob	responded.

Dillon’s	heart	pounded	in	his	chest.	He	knew	now	that	his	life	was	about	to

be	cut	short.	And	the	worst	thing	was	that	he	got	his	sister	and	brother	mixed	up in	 this	 as	 well,	 and	 now	 they	 were	 about	 to	 pay	 the	 ultimate	 price	 because	 of him.

“How	 are	 you	 going	 to	 explain	 the	 disappearances	 of	 three	 kids?”	 Derek insisted,	trying	to	talk	reason	into	the	madman.	“Don’t	do	this!”	he	yelled.

“Oh	 …	 we’ll	 think	 of	 something,”	 said	 Troy	 as	 he	 dismissed	 Derek’s	 plea.

“We	always	do.”

Rob	 strolled	 over	 and	 stood	 before	 the	 boys.	 He	 reached	 down,	 going	 for Dillon’s	neck,	but	before	he	could	get	close	enough	Jordan	shot	his	hand	up	and

grabbed	 the	 man’s	 wrist.	 Rob	 smiled.	 Then	 his	 smile	 turned	 into	 a	 look	 of confusion	 as	 he	 found	 that	 he	 couldn’t	 move	 his	 hand	 toward	 Dillon	 anymore.

He	 looked	 at	 Jordan	 who	 stared	 back,	 a	 mischievous	 grin	 on	 his	 face.	 Jordan held	 up	 his	 other	 hand	 revealing	 a	 small	 syringe	 with	 the	 label	 on	 it	 that	 read: Centrigenix.	Before	Rob	could	react	Jordan	grabbed	him	by	the	shirt	and	threw

him	 across	 the	 room.	 Rob	 slammed	 into	 the	 other	 guy	 who,	 a	 moment	 earlier, helped	 bring	 Dillon	 and	 Jordan	 into	 the	 room	 from	 the	 lab.	 The	 man	 slammed the	 back	 of	 his	 head	 into	 the	 wall	 and	 the	 crack	 from	 the	 blow	 reverberated

through	the	room.	Both	he	and	Rob	slumped	to	the	ground	in	a	heap.

Tara	grabbed	Gwen	and	pulled	her	aside	as	Rob	flew	through	the	air	like	a

rag	doll.	They	both	stumbled	and	fell	to	the	ground.	Troy	dived	out	of	the	way	of the	human	projectile.

“Whoa!”	 was	 all	 that	 Dillon	 could	 say	 as	 he	 looked	 at	 his	 brother’s	 handy-work.

Jordan	smiled	at	him.	“This	stuff	works	pretty	good!	Quick,	go	grab	Gwen,”

he	 yelled	 as	 he	 headed	 to	 the	 cages.	 Dillon	 nodded	 and	 ran	 as	 fast	 as	 he	 could toward	 the	 fray	 of	 bodies,	 hoping	 he	 would	 get	 there	 before	 they	 got	 back	 to their	senses.

“Stop	them!”	Troy	yelled	as	he	stumbled	toward	one	of	the	nearby	desks.

Dillon	leaped	over	top	of	Rob	and	the	other	guy	and	grabbed	Gwen	by	the

hand.	Her	eyes	were	still	glowing	yellow.	Tara	still	held	onto	Gwen’s	other	arm

as	she	tried	to	get	up.	Dillon	quickly	slipped	his	pack	off	and	swung	it	as	hard	as he	could.	He	heard	a	loud	crack	as	the	bag	landed	squarely	on	the	woman’s	face.

She	jolted	backward	and	hit	the	floor,	writhing	in	pain	and	holding	her	nose.

Jordan	 got	 to	 Derek’s	 cage,	 grabbed	 the	 lock,	 and	 pulled	 it	 off	 as	 though	 it was	made	of	cheap	plastic	instead	of	steel.	Derek	looked	at	him	in	amazement,

but	before	he	could	say	anything	Jordan	was	off	to	the	next	cage	tearing	the	lock free.

Troy	 reached	 for	 something	 in	 one	 of	 the	 desks.	 It	 was	 a	 small	 tablet.	 He started	sliding	his	finger	across	the	screen	and	hitting	buttons	as	he	went.	Jordan finished	breaking	the	last	lock	off	the	cages	and	turned	to	see	where	Dillon	was.

As	he	did	so,	he	heard	the	ugly	howl	of	coyotes,	and	a	loud	hissing	sound.	He

smiled	 as	 he	 saw	 creatures	 coming	 into	 the	 room	 from	 the	 hallway	 to	 the	 left.

There	 were	 three	 coyote-type	 creatures,	 that	 large	 snake-thing	 they	 had encountered	in	the	information	center,	and	a	few	of	those	spider	beasts.

“Let’s	do	this!”	Jordan	screamed.

Dillon	 pulled	 Gwen	 up	 and	 tried	 to	 get	 her	 away	 from	 the	 sprawled-out people	 they	 were	 in	 the	 midst	 of.	 Rob	 was	 beginning	 to	 stir,	 but	 the	 other	 guy looked	 as	 though	 he	 was	 out	 cold.	 Dillon	 managed	 to	 get	 Gwen	 over	 to	 where the	others	were.	Thankfully	she	didn’t	resist	or	appear	as	if	she	was	going	to	put

up	a	fight;	she	just	stared	blankly	with	those	yellow	eyes.

The	 people	 working	 at	 the	 stations	 were	 equally	 disinterested	 in	 the	 events that	were	transpiring	around	them.	They	just	sat	at	their	terminals	and	continued to	work.	It	was	both	comical	and	eerie	all	at	the	same	time!

“Make	 sure	 nothing	 happens	 to	 Gwen,”	 Dillon	 shouted	 to	 his	 brother	 as	 he grabbed	 something	 out	 of	 the	 side	 of	 his	 backpack	 and	 started	 off,	 running	 for Troy	as	fast	as	he	could.

“What	are	you	doing	you	numbskull!”	Jordan	cried	after	him.

Dillon	ducked	as	one	of	the	coyotes	lunged	for	him,	narrowly	missing	him	as

he	ran	for	Troy.	Troy	looked	up	just	in	time	to	see	Dillon	charging.	He	tried	to move	out	of	the	way	but	couldn’t	get	clear.	Dillon	leaped	upon	him	and	plunged

the	Necrotoxin	into	Troys	side.	Troy	screamed	in	pain	and	managed	to	backhand

Dillon	across	the	face.	The	boy	tumbled	off.	He	almost	swooned,	but	managed	to

shake	 away	 the	 dizziness.	 He	 lunged	 toward	 Troy	 with	 his	 other	 hand,	 another syringe	leading	the	way.	Troy	howled	and	thrashed.	He	hit	Dillon’s	arm	and	the

syringe	 went	 flying	 from	 his	 grasp.	 It	 hit	 the	 ground	 and	 rolled	 away.	 Troy grabbed	his	head	and	screamed	more	as	he	hunched	over.	Dillon	was	surprised

that	 the	 syringe	 didn’t	 shattered	 on	 impact	 when	 it	 hit	 the	 floor.	 He	 counted himself	lucky	and	tried	to	dive	toward	it	but	Troy	suddenly	swung	out	with	one

of	his	arms	and	hit	the	boy	on	the	side.	Dillon	felt	the	wind	being	blasted	from his	lungs	with	the	force	of	the	blow	which	sent	him	flying	into	the	wall.

“What	 have	 you	 done?”	 screamed	 Derek	 as	 they	 all	 watched	 in	 horror	 as Troy	began	to	transform.

Dillon	 shook	 off	 the	 dizziness	 again	 and	 stumbled	 back	 toward	 the	 cages where	Gwen	and	Jordan	were	with	Derek	and	Tom	Tom.

“I	 was	 trying	 to	 get	 him	 with	 the	 Necrotoxin	 and	 Genesis!”	 Dillon	 tried	 to explain.	“But	he	knocked	Genesis	out	of	my	hand	before	I	could	inject	him.”

“Good	idea—bad	execution!”	Derek	screamed.

“Ya	…	sorry	about	that.”

They	 heard	 bone	 crunching	 and	 skin	 tearing.	 His	 howls	 turned	 into	 a	 deep, guttural,	 demonic	 scream.	 He	 fell	 over	 a	 nearby	 chair	 and	 curled	 up	 on	 the ground,	writhing	in	absolute	pain.	Four	large	spikes	shot	out	of	his	back	spraying

blood	 and	 yellowish	 spinal	 fluid	 everywhere;	 his	 muscles	 bulged	 as	 they	 tore through	his	shirt,	and	his	skin	turned	a	dark	bluish	hue.	As	Troy’s	transformation ensued,	 even	 the	 creatures	 who	 had	 charged	 into	 the	 room	 a	 moment	 earlier stopped	their	approach	toward	their	intended	victims.

Troy’s	 screams	 died	 down	 and	 his	 writhing	 slowed	 until	 he	 finally	 stopped moving.

“Is	he	dead?”	Dillon	heard	Gwen	say	in	a	soft	quivering	voice.

He	 looked	 at	 her	 in	 dismay.	 Her	 eyes	 no	 longer	 shone	 in	 that	 eery	 yellow glow.	A	moment	earlier	she	was	a	captive	zombie	but	now	she	appeared	normal.

He	 looked	 over	 to	 where	 John	 and	 the	 others	 were	 and	 noticed	 that	 they	 were shaking	their	heads	and	regaining	their	senses.

The	 creatures	 that	 had	 entered	 the	 room	 were	 all	 looking	 around	 as	 though they	 were	 unsure	 of	 who	 they	 should	 attack.	 Their	 eyes	 didn’t	 glow	 anymore either.	A	coyote	approached	the	monstrous	mass	that	used	to	be	Troy	and	began

to	 sniff	 and	 growl	 at	 it.	 With	 lightning	 speed	 a	 large	 clawed	 hand	 grabbed	 the creature	by	the	neck.	A	loud	snap	was	heard	and	the	coyote	went	limp.

Still	holding	the	unfortunate	creature	in	his	grasp,	the	monster	that	had	been

Troy	 a	 moment	 earlier	 began	 to	 slowly	 stand;	 his	 back	 facing	 Dillon	 and	 the others.	It	grasped	the	edge	of	one	of	the	tables	for	support	as	it	stood	to	its	full height.	That	was	when	Dillon	noticed	the	shattered	tablet	that	Troy	used	to	call the	creatures—and	probably	control	John	and	the	others—at	his	feet.

Rob,	still	shaking	off	the	dizziness,	was	able	to	finally	stand.	He	looked	over

to	the	towering	monster.	His	eyes	went	wide	as	he	saw	the	hulking	beast	just	a

few	 feet	 from	 where	 he	 was.	 He	 turned	 to	 run	 when	 Troy	 swung	 his	 free	 arm around.	The	massive	clawed	hand	hammered	into	the	back	of	Rob,	sending	him

flying	into	the	wall.	His	limp	body	skipped	off	the	wall	and	bounced	to	the	floor.

He	rolled	a	couple	times	and	came	to	rest	at	Dillon’s	feet.	The	young	boy	looked down	at	the	body	in	horror,	then	glanced	up	to	where	Troy	was.

The	 huge	 beast	 turned	 around	 slowly.	 His	 head	 was	 misshapen	 to	 resemble more	of	a	dog	than	a	human.	His	eyes	were	large	and	bloodshot,	and	he	now	had

huge	 canine	 fangs	 protruding	 from	 his	 massive	 maw.	 He	 looked	 down	 at	 his transformed	 body	 as	 if	 trying	 to	 process	 what	 had	 happened	 to	 him,	 then	 he

threw	the	dead	coyote	to	the	side.	The	creature	flew	into	one	of	the	spider	things which	issued	a	high-pitched	shrill.	Troy	narrowed	his	eyes	at	Dillon	and	began

to	growl.

“What	now?”	Jordan	asked,	desperation	in	his	voice.

“We	need	that	syringe,”	Dillon	replied,	looking	over	to	where	it	had	bounced

and	rolled	across	the	ground.	“It’s	our	only	option	now.”

Troy	 hunched	 low	 and	 opened	 both	 his	 hands	 fully,	 showing	 his	 wicked

looking	claws.	He	stared	at	the	boys	with	evil	intent	and	roared,	spittle	spraying from	his	mouth.





25

T H E 	 F I G H T 	 F O R 	 T H E I R 	 L I V E S !

Jordan	grabbed	Gwen	and	dove	to	the	side	as	the	monster	charged.	Derek,

Dillon	 and	 Tom	 Tom	 scattered,	 scrambling	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 way	 just	 in time	 as	 the	 beast	 slammed	 into	 the	 cages,	 crumpling	 the	 bars	 as	 though they	were	nothing.

Jordan	 easily	 sprinted	 to	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 room	 with	 Gwen	 under	 one arm.	 He	 felt	 so	 charged	 up	 from	 the	 Centrigenix	 as	 he	 leaped	 into	 the	 air	 and easily	cleared	some	chairs,	a	lab	table,	and	one	of	the	guys	who	was	still	coming out	from	the	mind	control	of	the	neurogenic	transmitter.	He	landed	softly	on	the other	side	and	ducked	down	behind	the	table	with	his	little	sister.	As	they	came over	 the	 counter	 one	 of	 the	 coyotes	 lunged	 in	 their	 direction.	 Jordan	 threw	 his arm	out	wide	in	order	to	protect	him	and	his	sister.	His	backhand	connected	with the	creature	with	such	force	that	it	was	sent	flying	all	the	way	across	the	room.	It hit	the	wall	with	a	crack	and	crumpled	to	the	ground.	He	looked	at	his	hand	for	a moment,	not	sure	what	to	make	of	his	new-found	power.	Apparently	his	reflexes

were	just	as	dialled	up	as	his	muscles	were.

“You	 wait	 here	 okay	 Gwen,”	 Jordan	 said	 softly	 as	 he	 turned	 and	 looked	 at her,	 trying	 to	 be	 as	 soothing	 as	 possible.	 “Try	 and	 hide	 from	 …	 well	 …

everything.”	He	stood	up	and	turned	to	head	back.	Gwen	grabbed	his	arm.

“Be	careful	please,”	she	said,	tears	welling	up	in	her	eyes.

Jordan	smiled	back	at	her	and	nodded.	His	face	turned	grim	as	he	surveyed

the	 chaos.	 A	 couple	 of	 the	 spider	 creatures	 were	 attacking	 one	 of	 the	 scientists





who,	 a	 moment	 earlier,	 was	 under	 the	 influence	 of	 the	 neurogenic	 transmitter.

John,	himself,	was	fighting	off	the	other	coyote	with	what	appeared	to	be	a	chair leg	 and	 a	 scalpel,	 and	 Tom	 Tom	 was	 keeping	 the	 serpent-thing	 busy.	 Then	 he saw	it—the	main	event	was	about	to	begin	once	Troy	dislodged	himself	from	the

bars—Troy	 verses	 Derek!	 Derek	 was	 equipping	 himself	 for	 the	 fight	 as	 he walked	toward	the	creature.

Man!	That	guys	got	guts! Jordan	thought	to	himself .

DILLON	 SCRAMBLED	 OVER	 ROB’S	 LIMP	 BODY	 AS	 HE	 DISTANCED	 HIMSELF	 FROM

the	creature	in	his	search	for	the	syringe.	Troy	grunted	as	he	pulled	himself	out from	the	mangled	mess	of	bars	and	whipped	his	head	around	to	see	Dillon	across

the	 room.	 His	 eyes	 narrowed	 and	 his	 lips	 curled	 up	 in	 a	 monstrous	 snarl	 as	 he started	toward	him.	Suddenly	a	loud	crack	rang	through	the	air.	His	head	jolted

to	 the	 side	 with	 the	 force	 of	 the	 blow.	 He	 shook	 it	 off	 and	 turned	 to	 see	 Derek standing	there	with	a	chunk	of	bar	he	had	grabbed	from	the	cages.

Derek	 went	 in	 for	 another	 strike	 but	 Troy	 easily	 deflected	 it	 with	 his	 huge muscled	forearm.	The	force	of	the	hit	would	have	broken	a	regular	persons	arm

in	two,	but	the	beast	acted	as	though	he	didn’t	even	feel	it.	Derek	swung	again, but	Troy	grabbed	the	bar	and	ripped	it	from	his	grasp.

The	 monster	 stood	 to	 his	 full	 ten	 foot	 height,	 howled	 like	 a	 demon—spit spraying	 from	 his	 mouth—and	 came	 down	 toward	 Derek.	 The	 battle-hardened man	 tried	 to	 maneuver	 around	 and	 grab	 another	 weapon,	 but	 held	 his	 ribs	 and winced	in	pain	which	caused	him	to	stumble	and	slump	to	this	knees.	He	got	into

the	 best	 defensive	 position	 he	 could	 in	 order	 to	 receive	 the	 charge	 from	 the creature,	but	knew	it	would	be	futile,	and	that	his	life	was	about	to	end.

The	monster	stormed	in;	he	could	almost	smell	its	foul	breath.

JORDAN	 SAW	 DEREK	 ATTACK	 THE	 CREATURE	 AND	 KNEW	 HE	 NEEDED	 HELP.	 HE



easily	 leaped	 over	 the	 counter	 and	 sprinted	 toward	 Troy.	 He	 could	 see	 the monster	 coming	 in	 at	 Derek	 with	 the	 force	 of	 a	 rhino.	 With	 all	 the	 power	 he could	generate	with	his	enhanced	body	he	slammed	into	the	behemoth	with	his

shoulder.	He	issued	a	loud	scream	as	he	rocked	into	the	beast.

Troy	was	launched	into	the	air	with	the	strength	of	a	giant	and	crashed	into

the	wall	of	cages	again.	Derek	couldn’t	believe	what	he	saw!

“Get	 out	 of	 here!”	 Jordan	 yelled,	 rubbing	 his	 shoulder	 with	 his	 hand.	 His charge	was	effective	but	he	didn’t	come	away	from	it	totally	unscathed.	In	truth, however,	Jordan	felt	that	he	got	less	hurt	than	he	would	have	ever	expected	to.

He	 walked	 over	 to	 what	 was	 left	 of	 the	 cages	 and	 easily	 pulled	 a	 chunk	 of	 bar from	the	concrete	floor.

“Not	gonna	happen	kid,”	Derek	replied	as	he	pulled	himself	up	and	limped

over	 and	 retrieved	 the	 bar	 he	 had	 just	 a	 moment	 earlier.	 “We’re	 gonna	 do	 this together.”

Jordan	 smiled.	 It	 was	 a	 weird	 feeling	 as	 he	 never	 really	 considered	 himself incredibly	brave	before.	But	now	he	just	had	a	feeling	of	absolute	superiority.	It had	to	be	the	Centrigenix.

“I	don’t	know	what	you’re	on,”	said	Derek,	“but	I	wish	I	had	some.”

Jordan	smiled	at	the	comment.

Troy	 shook	 his	 head	 again	 as	 he	 got	 up	 from	 the	 mess	 once	 more	 and howled.	He	now	appeared	angrier	than	ever!

DILLON	 LOOKED	 OVER	 TO	 WHERE	 TROY	 WAS	 AND	 SAW	 DEREK	 HIT	 HIM	 ON	 THE

side	 of	 the	 head	 with	 such	 force	 that	 he	 could	 hear	 the	 crack	 reverberate throughout	 the	 room.	 He	 knew	 that	 he	 had	 to	 find	 Genesis	 fast.	 He	 scrambled around	the	floor	on	his	hands	and	knees	in	search	of	the	syringe.	He	knew	it	had to	 be	 over	 here	 somewhere.	 Then	 he	 saw	 it!	 It	 had	 rolled	 under	 one	 of	 the	 lab tables	 when	 it	 was	 knocked	 from	 his	 hand.	 He	 started	 to	 crawl	 toward	 it	 when suddenly	he	felt	something	grab	his	leg.	He	turned	to	see	Tara	trying	to	pull	him in.	Her	nose	was	clearly	broken	from	the	impact	of	Dillon’s	backpack	earlier—





blood	 dripped	 easily	 from	 it	 as	 she	 reached	 for	 the	 boy	 with	 her	 other	 hand.

Dillon	 shot	 his	 free	 leg	 out	 and	 smashed	 her	 in	 the	 face	 again.	 Oh	 how	 she screamed	as	his	foot	shattered	her	nose	more	thoroughly!

She	let	go	of	his	leg	as	she	cried	out	in	agony,	cupping	her	face	in	her	hands.

When	 Dillon	 turned	 his	 head	 back	 toward	 his	 goal	 he	 saw	 one	 of	 the	 spiders standing	 in	 front	 of	 it,	 staring	 at	 him	 with	 its	 large	 bulbous	 eyes.	 It’s	 pincers snapped	threateningly.

TOM	 TOM	 BARELY	 MANAGED	 TO	 DODGE	 THE	 SNAPPING	 MAW	 OF	 THE	 SNAKE

creature.	He	didn’t	know	if	he	could	keep	this	up	for	much	longer.	He	heard	the

chaotic	battles	that	were	going	on	throughout	the	entire	room,	but	tried	to	remain focussed	upon	the	current	threat	in	front	of	him.

The	creature	swung	a	scaly	clawed	hand	around	and	clipped	the	man	on	the

shoulder.	 Tom	 Tom	 screamed	 in	 pain	 as	 he	 grabbed	 for	 his	 shoulder	 and	 fell back,	 tripping	 over	 a	 chair	 and	 landing	 hard	 on	 the	 floor.	 Four	 lines	 of	 blood splayed	 through	 his	 shirt	 where	 the	 thing	 had	 hit	 him.	 It	 hissed	 and	 reared	 up, much	like	a	cobra	would	do	just	before	it	came	in	to	strike	the	final	blow	on	its victim.	As	it	came	in	for	the	kill	Tom	Tom	quickly	grabbed	the	chair	and	shot	it upwards	in	its	path.	The	thing	hit	it	hard,	snapping	and	hissing,	trying	to	get	to its	 prey.	 Tom	 Tom	 felt	 himself	 sliding	 across	 the	 floor	 from	 the	 force	 that	 the creature	 was	 exerting	 on	 the	 chair.	 For	 some	 reason	 it	 wasn’t	 reaching	 around with	 its	 muscled	 arms,	 but	 was	 rather	 trying	 to	 slither	 through	 the	 desperate man’s	 defences	 with	 its	 head.	 The	 old	 man	 only	 hoped	 that	 the	 creature	 would continue	 to,	 apparently,	 forget	 about	 its	 other	 appendages.	 If	 it	 did	 he	 thought that	he	might	have	a	chance.

He	held	on	stubbornly	with	each	lunge	of	the	snake,	not	willing	to	allow	the

creature	to	take	his	life	from	him.



JORDAN	SIDESTEPPED	THE	INCOMING	ATTACK.	HE	FELT	THE	CLAWED	HAND	PASS	BY

him	just	inches	from	his	face.

Derek	 swung	 his	 bar	 from	 the	 other	 side	 and	 connected	 solidly	 on	 Troy’s arm.	The	creature	howled	and	came	up	at	him	with	his	other	hand.	As	he	swung

around	 Jordan	 connected	 with	 his	 bar	 solidly	 on	 the	 beast’s	 side.	 The	 shock	 of the	blow	rocked	the	huge	creature	from	his	solid	footing	and	put	him	off	balance.

Derek	 came	 in	 again,	 but	 Troy	 managed	 to	 react	 quicker	 than	 the	 man	 had expected	and	blocked	the	blow.	The	creature	returned	the	strike	and	Derek	tried

to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 way	 but	 got	 clipped	 on	 the	 shoulder	 by	 his	 massive	 hand.

Despite	 the	 lessened	 force	 in	 the	 attack	 due	 to	 Jordan’s	 hit,	 Derek	 went	 flying back	and	spun	around	a	couple	of	times	before	landing	on	a	table	and	toppling

onto	the	ground.

Troy	held	his	side	where	Jordan	landed	the	hit	and	backed	away	a	step	from

the	kid.	He	eyed	him	cautiously.	“You	fast	and	strong,”	Troy	grunted,	shifting	to the	side.

Jordan	frowned	as	he	looked	at	Troy.	“You	ape	man	or	something?	That’s	not

how	people	talk.”

Troy	 smiled,	 his	 yellowed	 eyes	 glinting	 with	 cunning.	 “You	 die,”	 he	 said, and	then	he	rushed	in	at	Jordan.

DILLON	EYED	THE	CREATURE	AS	IT	SLOWLY	MOVED	TOWARD	HIM	MENACINGLY.	HE

backed	up	and	started	to	stand.	The	spider	leaped!	Dillon	ducked	just	in	time	as the	creature	flew	overtop	of	him.	He	spun	around	quickly	to	see	that	the	spider

had	 already	 landed	 and	 was	 running	 toward	 him	 again.	 As	 it	 sprang	 he	 deftly unslung	his	backpack	and	swung	it	out	in	front.	It	clipped	the	creature	and	sent	it off	to	the	side.	Hardly	injured,	it	jumped	at	Dillon	again.	This	time	he	barely	got his	pack	out	in	front.	The	thing	latched	on,	trying	to	climb	overtop	and	onto	the young	boy.	It	snapped	its	pincers	wildly,	tearing	into	the	bag.

Frantically,	 Dillon	 tried	 to	 shake	 it	 off,	 but	 the	 thing	 wouldn’t	 let	 go.	 It snapped	at	one	of	Dillon’s	hands.	He	managed	to	pull	mostly	out	of	the	way,	but



got	nipped	across	two	of	his	fingers.	He	screamed	in	pain	as	he	pulled	his	hand

back	and	threw	the	bag	to	the	floor	as	he	backed	away.

The	horrid	creature	climbed	out	from	behind	it	and	advanced.	It	leaped	and

Dillon	dove	under	the	nearby	table.	The	thing	nimbly	landed	on	top	of	the	table.

Dillon	crouched	down,	looking	to	both	sides	wondering	which	way	the	creature

would	attack	from.	He	looked	at	his	hand	and	noticed	that	the	cuts	weren’t	too

bad.	 He	 just	 hoped	 the	 spider	 wasn’t	 venomous,	 but	 he’d	 have	 to	 worry	 about that	later.

As	 he	 looked	 around	 he	 noticed	 the	 syringe	 again,	 only	 a	 few	 feet	 from where	 he	 was	 hiding.	 Quickly,	 he	 shot	 his	 hand	 out	 from	 under	 the	 table	 and grabbed	it,	hoping	that	the	spider	thing	didn’t	see	the	movement.	As	he	looked

up,	he	saw	Gwen	pulling	supplies	out	of	a	cupboard.	She	snatched	up	a	scalpel

in	shaking	hands	and	crawled	into	the	hiding	place.	He	had	one	last	glimpse	of

her	tear	streaked	face	before	she	pulled	the	door	closed.

Dillon’s	 gut	 twisted	 with	 guilt.	 He	 had	 gotten	 Gwen	 into	 this.	 She	 hadn’t asked	 to	 face	 a	 gruesome	 death.	 His	 curiosity	 did	 that	 to	 her.	 He	 gripped	 the syringe	tighter	in	his	fist.	He	wouldn’t	let	Gwen	die.	He	would	die	first.

As	fast	as	lightning	he	sprang	out	from	under	the	table	in	a	dead	run	toward

Troy.

TOM	TOM’S	 ARMS	 WERE	 GETTING	 WEAK	 WITH	 THE	 RELENTLESS	 ATTACKS	 OF	 THE

creature.	 He	 knew	 his	 time	 was	 near.	 The	 creature	 had	 finally	 realized	 that	 its arms	 were	 long	 enough	 to	 reach	 around	 the	 chair	 the	 old	 man	 was	 using	 to defend	himself.	It	swung	an	arm	around	and	grabbed	Tom	Tom	by	the	shoulder.

It	 squeezed	 down	 hard,	 sinking	 its	 dirty	 claws	 into	 the	 man’s	 flesh.	 Tom	 Tom screamed!

With	 that	 one	 arm	 it	 hoisted	 him	 into	 the	 air.	 Tom	 Tom’s	 screams	 echoed throughout	 the	 room.	 The	 snake	 hissed	 wildly	 and	 pulled	 back	 his	 other	 arm, readying	for	the	final	blow	that	would	take	the	man	down.

The	 old	 man’s	 eyes	 rolled	 back	 into	 his	 head	 from	 the	 pain,	 then	 he	 felt



himself	falling.	He	hit	the	ground	hard	and	felt	pain	shooting	through	his	body.

Everything	was	spinning.	He	didn’t	know	if	he	was	dead	or	still	alive.	Then	he

heard	a	familiar	voice	speaking	to	him.

“Tom	Tom!	Tom	Tom!”	came	the	voice.

His	eyes	fluttered	open	and	there,	staring	at	him	from	above,	was	John!

“You	okay	old	friend?”	John	asked	frantically.	“Speak	to	me!”

“You	need	to	shave,”	replied	Tom	Tom	weakly	as	he	tried	to	smile.

John	laughed.	“Come	on	then.	We	need	to	get	you	out	of	here.”

“What	happened	to	the	snake-thing?”

“I	 gave	 it	 a	 cocktail	 of	 acidic	 chemicals	 to	 take	 it	 down	 a	 notch,”	 John replied.	“It’s	not	going	to	bother	anyone	again.”

Tom	Tom	looked	over	at	the	creature	only	a	few	feet	away	writhing	on	the

ground	in	absolute	agony.	It	appeared	to	be	in	its	death	throes.	“You	got	anymore of	that?”	he	asked.

“Unfortunately	 not,”	 replied	 John	 as	 he	 placed	 one	 of	 Tom	 Tom’s	 arms

around	his	neck.	“I	have	no	more	compounds	to	use.	The	others	are	on	their	own

with	that.”	He	turned	slightly	to	note	the	battle	that	was	going	on	by	the	cages with	 Troy,	 Jordan,	 and	 Derek.	 They	 saw	 Derek	 go	 down	 and	 Jordan	 knock	 the creature	into	the	cages	again.

“That	kid’s	got	spirit,”	Tom	Tom	remarked.

“He	has	more	than	that,”	John	replied	cryptically.	“Let’s	hope	it’s	enough,”

he	finished	as	he	began	moving	Tom	Tom	to	the	other	side	of	the	room,	careful

to	avoid	those	who	would	never	have	a	chance	to	leave	again.

DILLON	 RAN	 ACROSS	 THE	 ROOM	 AS	 FAST	 AS	 HIS	 FEET	 WOULD	 CARRY	 HIM.	 HE

glanced	 back	 and	 saw	 that	 the	 spider	 was	 in	 pursuit	 and	 gaining	 on	 him.	 He looked	down	at	the	syringe	while	he	ran	and	knew	that	he	only	had	one	shot	at

this.	At	that	moment	he	realized	he	couldn’t	be	concerned	with	the	spider-thing

right	now.	He	knew	what	he	had	to	do.



TROY	 CAME	 AT	 JORDAN	 WITH	 ALL	 HIS	 FURY!	 THE	 TEENAGER	 MET	 THE	 CHARGE.

He	balled	up	his	hand	into	a	tight	fist	and	punched	Troy	right	in	the	stomach	as he	 came	 in.	 He	 could	 tell	 that	 the	 blow	 had	 hurt	 the	 creature,	 but	 Troy	 didn’t relent	 from	 his	 attack.	 He	 swung	 his	 fist	 around	 and	 nailed	 Jordan	 right	 in	 the face.	Jordan’s	head	rocked	to	the	side,	but	he	shook	off	the	blow.

Jordan	punched	again,	this	time	hitting	him	in	the	face.	Troy’s	head	snapped

back	from	the	blow.	The	creature	grabbed	Jordan	around	the	throat	with	his	other hand	and	punched	him	in	the	stomach.	The	kid	felt	that	one!	But	he	shook	off	the pain	and	came	in	again	with	another	punch,	screaming	as	he	did.	Troy	took	the

punch	 and	 pulled	 back	 again	 with	 his	 free	 hand,	 opening	 it	 as	 he	 did,	 showing his	terrible	claws,	claws	that	were	surely	going	to	disembowel	the	kid.	Somehow

Jordan	 managed	 to	 grab	 the	 beast’s	 wrist	 and	 deflect	 the	 oncoming	 blow.	 One claw	 managed	 to	 glance	 across	 Jordan’s	 side,	 drawing	 a	 line	 of	 blood.	 Jordan winced	from	the	pain,	but	took	the	opportunity	to	kick	out	at	Troy’s	leg.	He	hit him	solidly	in	the	upper	thigh	which	caused	the	monster	to	stumble	a	little.

Troy	quickly	recovered	and	hoisted	Jordan	up	by	the	neck	and	slammed	him

against	 the	 wall.	 The	 boy	 didn’t	 give	 in	 but	 continued	 to	 trade	 blows	 with	 the creature.	Blood	started	to	flow	from	both	of	their	faces.	Jordan	realized	that	the Centrigenix	 must	 also	 have	 pain	 dampening	 properties	 in	 order	 to	 endure	 this amount	of	punishment,	as	he	seemed	to	be	holding	his	own	against	the	ferocious

beast.

He	felt	Troy’s	grip	tightening,	trying	to	close	off	his	air	supply.	He	shot	his

free	hand	up	and	grabbed	the	creature’s	arm.	He	started	to	press	down	with	all

his	 enhanced	 might.	 The	 strength	 of	 the	 two	 opponents	 seemed	 comparable	 to each	other	as	Jordan	couldn’t	break	the	hold.	He	dropped	the	bar	and	grabbed	on

with	his	other	hand	and	started	to	scream	as	he	pressed	down	on	the	creature’s

wrist,	trying	to	break	the	hold.

Troy	reached	back	with	his	other	hand,	winding	up	for	another	strike.	Jordan

started	 to	 gasp—Troy’s	 grip	 was	 beginning	 to	 have	 an	 affect	 and	 he	 couldn’t break	 the	 hold.	 He	 could	 feel	 the	 creature’s	 claws	 digging	 into	 the	 back	 of	 his

neck	as	he	continued	to	squeeze	the	life	out	of	him.

Troy	 roared!	 Jordan	 knew	 that	 he	 was	 about	 to	 enter	 into	 darkness	 and	 he was	certain	he	wouldn’t	be	coming	out	of	it.





26

A N S W E R S

Jordan	gasped,	trying	desperately	to	get	air	into	his	lungs.	Troy	pulled	back

his	 free	 arm	 and	 readied	 to	 deliver	 the	 final	 blow.	 The	 beast	 snarled,	 but then	suddenly	glanced	to	the	side.

Dillon	crashed	into	the	creature	and	plunged	the	syringe	into	the	arm

that	was	holding	his	brother.	Troy	instantly	let	go	of	Jordan	and	began	to	scream as	 he	 held	 his	 arm.	 Jordan	 crumpled	 to	 the	 ground	 holding	 his	 throat	 and gasping.	The	spider	that	was	chasing	Dillon	leaped	for	the	young	boy,	but	Dillon pushed	himself	off	of	Troy	and	crashed	hard	on	the	ground.	The	spider-creature

landed	on	the	monster	as	it	started	to	move	away	from	the	boys.

The	monster	stumbled	away	screaming.	He	looked	in	horror	at	his	arm	as	it

actually	combusted!	The	spider	tried	to	leap	away	but	the	flames	quickly	spread

and	 ignited	 it	 as	 well.	 It	 squealed	 but	 still	 jumped	 for	 Dillon	 again.	 The	 boy quickly	shot	out	his	foot	and	knocked	it	away.	It	shrieked	and	then	slumped	to

the	ground,	being	consumed	by	the	fire.

The	flames	quickly	spread	to	all	other	parts	of	Troy’s	body	as	he	ran	wildly

in	 any	 direction	 he	 could.	 The	 screams	 were	 horrific!	 He	 didn’t	 make	 it	 far before	succumbing	to	his	fate.	The	smell	of	burning	flesh	quickly	filled	the	air.

Dillon	went	right	to	Jordan	to	see	if	he	was	okay.	Derek	stumbled	to	his	feet

and	stared	at	the	combusting	mass	just	a	few	feet	away.

“Are	you	okay	bro?”	Dillon	asked.

Jordan	nodded,	unable	to	talk	just	yet.

Relief	hit	him	as	he	slump	back,	thankful	that	his	brother	was	alright.	Then	it struck	 him.	 “Wait	 …	 we	 need	 to	 see	 if	 Gwen’s	 okay!”	 Dillon	 said	 urgently, remembering	that	his	sister	was	stowed	away	in	a	cupboard.

Dillon	ran	over	as	fast	as	he	could	and	threw	the	cupboard	doors	open.	Gwen

shrieked.	 When	 she	 saw	 Dillon	 standing	 there	 she	 dropped	 the	 scalpel	 and launched	herself	at	him.	He	wrapped	her	in	a	big	hug	that	seemed	to	last	forever.

“You’re	okay,”	he	reassured	her.	“We	all	are.”

After	what	seemed	a	long	while	she	finally	let	go.	She	wiped	the	tears	from

her	eyes	and	followed	her	brother	over	to	where	Jordan	and	Derek	were.	She	ran

to	Jordan	and	wrapped	her	arms	around	him.

“Come	 on	 everyone.	 We	 have	 to	 go,”	 said	 an	 insistent	 Tom	 Tom	 waving

them	 over	 from	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 room.	 He	 and	 John	 were	 standing	 at	 the door	 on	 the	 opposite	 side	 of	 the	 room	 from	 where	 Dillon,	 Jordan,	 and	 Gwen came	through	earlier.

Derek,	 the	 kids,	 and	 two	 of	 John’s	 team	 members	 who	 managed	 to	 survive the	onslaught	rushed	over	and,	as	Dillon	was	exiting	the	room,	his	eyes	glanced

upon	the	smouldering	mass	of	what	remained	of	Troy’s	monstrous	body.	After	a

brief	moment	he	turned	and	walked	away,	sealing	that	image	in	his	mind.

They	 walked	 through	 a	 corridor	 and	 came	 to	 another	 room	 which	 had	 the label	“Medical	Aid”	written	above	it.

“We’ll	 look	 at	 everyone’s	 injuries	 here	 before	 we	 head	 back	 to	 the	 resort,”

John	explained	as	he	opened	the	door.

The	 room	 was	 large	 and	 well	 furnished	 with	 all	 the	 supplies	 they	 needed.

Everyone	 found	 a	 cot	 to	 sit	 down	 on	 as	 John	 and	 his	 crew	 started	 to	 assess everyone’s	 injuries.	 Thankfully,	 one	 of	 the	 men	 who	 had	 survived,	 Trevor,	 had medical	training	and	started	addressing	the	injuries.

“Good	 job	 Dillon.”	 Derek	 congratulated	 as	 he	 sat	 beside	 him	 waiting	 for Trevor	 to	 get	 set	 up	 with	 his	 supplies.	 “But	 are	 you	 okay?”	 he	 asked sympathetically.

Dillon	 looked	 at	 him	 for	 a	 long	 moment,	 not	 really	 understanding	 at	 first what	 Derek	 was	 asking.	 Then	 the	 realization	 of	 his	 question,	 and	 what	 he	 had just	done,	began	to	sink	in	as	tears	started	to	well	up	in	his	eyes.

“You	had	no	choice,”	Derek	said	comfortingly.	“It	was	either	Troy	or	the	rest of	us.”

Dillon	 choked	 back	 the	 tears	 as	 his	 eyes	 went	 red	 and	 just	 nodded,	 fearing that	he	would	burst	out	crying	if	he	said	a	word.	He	had	just	killed	someone	and a	massive	load	of	guilt	started	to	well	up	inside	of	him.

“Who’s	this?”	John	asked	as	he	approached	with	another	first	aid	kit.

“This	is	Dillon	Hunt.	The	boy	who	is	responsible	for	cracking	all	the	clues

you	 left	 for	 us	 in	 order	 to	 find	 you,”	 Derek	 replied.	 “He’s	 also	 primarily responsible	for	saving	us	with	his	quick	thinking	of	using	the	Necrotoxin	and	the Genesis	serum.”

Dillon	knew	that	Derek	was	trying	to	justify	his	actions,	but	he	wasn’t	sure

he	 could	 ever	 feel	 good	 about	 the	 outcome	 of	 the	 choice	 he	 just	 made.	 It	 all happened	 so	 fast	 and	 he	 didn’t	 consider	 the	 consequences	 until	 after	 the confrontation	 was	 in	 full	 swing.	 Was	 there	 a	 better	 way	 he	 could	 have	 handled the	situation	so	that	he	wasn’t	forced	to	take	a	life?	Could	he	have	used	Jordan with	his	increased	strength	and	speed	to	overpower	everyone?	Or	was	the	action

that	he	took	merely	the	action	of	a	boy	whose	imagination	was	overactive	which

clouded	his	judgement	and	caused	him	to	make	a	rash	decision?	These	were	the

thoughts—and	 many	 more	 like	 them—that	 spiralled	 through	 the	 young	 boy’s mind.

“Well	then.	I’m	very	pleased	to	meet	you	Dillon	Hunt.	Any	relation	to	…	”

Derek	 put	 his	 hand	 on	 John’s	 arm	 and	 shook	 his	 head	 slightly	 in	 order	 to	 stop him	from	saying	more;	a	move	that	Dillon	didn’t	miss.

“You	know	Dillon,	I’m	impressed,”	John	continued	with	a	big	smile.	“How

did	you	know	that	the	Necrotoxin	wouldn’t	react	well	with	the	Genesis	serum?”

Dillon	 wiped	 his	 face	 with	 his	 shirt	 sleeve.	 “The	 little	 bit	 of	 information	 I was	 able	 to	 read	 about	 the	 chemicals	 in	 the	 lab	 said	 that	 they	 don’t	 react	 well together.	 I	 also	 saw	 one	 of	 the	 creatures	 combust	 just	 by	 touching	 Oasis	 land which	I	already	knew	was	created	by	Genesis.”

John	 laughed.	 “Very	 good!	 You’re	 absolutely	 right.	 These	 two	 chemicals

don’t	react	well	together.	In	fact,	the	Necrotoxin	is	made	from	the	waste	that	is produced	 when	 Genesis	 is	 created.	 With	 the	 addition	 of	 a	 couple	 more

compounds	 in	 the	 right	 quantities	 that	 act	 as	 reacting	 agents,	 even	 the	 slightest contact	causes	them	to	violently	respond	to	one	another.	It’s	a	bit	of	a	failsafe	I built	into	the	Necrotoxin	in	order	to	make	sure	there	was	a	way	to	manage	the

creatures	just	in	case	any	of	them	needed	to	be	dealt	with.”

“You	did	that	while	under	mind-control?”	Dillon	asked.

John	shrugged.	“I	guess.	I	can’t	explain	how	I	managed	it.	It	was	almost	like

a	waking	dream	most	of	the	time.	But	I	guess	that,	just	like	some	people	learn	to control	 parts	 of	 their	 dreams,	 I	 learned	 to	 control	 some	 parts	 of	 my	 actions.	 I couldn’t	help	but	conform	to	their	wishes,	but	part	of	me	was	able	to	control,	to an	extent,	some	of	the	outcome.”

“The	 thing	 that	 strikes	 me	 as	 odd	 though,”	 Derek	 interjected,	 “is	 that	 this Tokala	tribe	doesn’t	appear	to	me	as	having	the	ability	to	do	all	of	this	alone.”

“That’s	 because	 they	 didn’t,”	 came	 Tom	 Tom’s	 reply	 as	 he	 walked	 over	 to join	the	conversation.	“There’s	someone	else	behind	this.”

“Who?”

“I	don’t	know.	The	elders	are	really	tight-lipped	about	it.”

“Well	that’s	a	problem,”	Derek	stated	matter-of-factly.

“So	does	that	mean	that	the	whole	tribe	who	owns	and	runs	the	place	was	in

on	it?”

“No,	not	at	all,”	Tom	Tom	replied,	almost	sheepishly.	“We	were	deceived	by

the	 elders	 of	 our	 tribe	 just	 as	 you	 and	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 world	 have	 been	 over	 the last	number	of	years.	The	elders	came	to	us	before	we	built	any	of	the	resort	and explained	 that	 they	 had	 received	 a	 vision	 from	 the	 spirit	 animals	 that	 roamed these	 parts,	 and	 that	 they	 led	 them	 to	 a	 hidden	 oasis	 in	 the	 desert	 that	 no	 one knew	about.

“Of	course	we	were	all	skeptical	at	first,	but	when	they	showed	it	to	us	and

explained	 their	 vision	 of	 the	 future;	 that	 they	 were	 going	 to	 revitalize	 our	 tribe through	 the	 management	 of	 this	 oasis,	 the	 creation	 of	 the	 hotel,	 and	 the	 land which	 they	 would	 give	 us	 to	 live	 in	 this	 paradise	 …	 we	 couldn’t	 refuse	 the offer.”

“But	 why	 weren’t	 you	 able	 to	 storm	 in	 and	 find	 John	 without	 my	 help?”

asked	Dillon,	wondering	where	he	fit	into	this.	“And	why	me?”

Derek	 looked	 to	 the	 others	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 then	 back	 to	 Dillon.	 “We couldn’t	 risk	 an	 overt	 assault	 as	 we	 didn’t	 know	 exactly	 what	 we	 were	 dealing with.	We	had	sent	covert	teams	in	over	the	course	of	almost	eighteen	months	and

they	found	nothing.	So	we	needed	a	different	approach—we	needed	you.”

Dillon’s	 face	 went	 pale.	 “But	 why	 me?”	 he	 blurted,	 almost	 feeling	 like	 he was	on	a	roller	coaster	ride	that	he	couldn’t	get	off.	“How	did	you	know	I	would be	able	to	help?”

“Because	you	have	those	special	abilities	we	talked	about	and	saw	in	action,”

Derek	replied.	“Remember	that	I	told	you	that	you	were	destined	for	something

greater?	 As	 you	 get	 older	 it	 will	 all	 make	 more	 sense	 to	 you.	 I	 promise.	 When the	time	is	right	you	will	know.”	Derek	put	a	hand	on	his	shoulder	and	smiled.

“Come	 on,	 we	 need	 to	 get	 out	 of	 here	 so	 I	 can	 let	 our	 team	 know	 where	 this place	is	so	we	can	clean	it	up.	You	kids	must	be	tired.”

Trevor	and	John	bandaged	up	the	group	as	best	they	could	with	the	supplies

they	 had.	 Thankfully	 no	 one	 was	 really	 that	 injured,	 even	 Jordan,	 whose	 body had	started	to	heal	itself	with	the	aid	of	Centrigenix.

Dillon	had	a	thousand	more	questions	he	wanted	to	ask	but	somehow	knew

he	wouldn’t	be	getting	any	answers.	He	resigned	to	the	fact	that	he	would	have

to	be	patient	and	hopefully	get	those	answers	later—except	for	one.

“Why	does	the	Takala	tribe	leave	a	symbol	of	a	boxed-in	pentagram	with	the

eye	in	the	middle	of	it	all	over	the	place?”

John,	Tom	Tom,	and	Derek	all	stopped	and	looked	at	him	in	stunned	silence.

It	was	as	if	he	had	just	dropped	a	bomb.

“What	are	you	talking	about?”	Tom	Tom	asked.

“What?”	Derek	asked	as	well.

“You	know,	the	symbol	on	the	wall	at	the	front	desk	in	the	hotel,	here	in	the

tunnel,	and	carved	into	the	counter	at	the	information	center?”

That’s	…	”	Derek	started	to	say.	“That’s	nothing,”	he	said	after	he	composed

himself.

“But	what	does	it	mean?”	Dillon	asked.

“I	don’t	know,”	Derek	responded.	“But	I’m	going	to	find	out.”





27

T H E 	 V A C A T I O N ’ S 	 E N D

“Dillon!	Dillon!”	he	heard	someone	say	as	he	felt	himself	being

shaken.

Dillon’s	 eyes	 started	 to	 flutter	 and	 then	 he	 had	 a	 sudden

feeling	of	dread.	His	eyes	popped	open	as	he	tried	to	back	away	from	whatever	it was	that	was	shaking	him.

“Whoa	…	easy.”

He	 felt	 disoriented	 and	 was	 sure	 that	 some	 sort	 of	 monster	 was	 trying	 to attack	him.	His	eyes	darted	around	trying	to	find	out	where	he	was	and	what	was

going	on.	As	he	adjusted	to	his	surroundings	he	realized	that	he	was	safe	in	his hotel	room.	Dad	was	standing	in	front	of	him	and	smiling	disarmingly	at	him.

“It’s	just	me.	Dad.”

Dillon	looked	around	skeptically	but	quickly	realized	that	he	actually	was	in

his	room.	His	brother	Jordan	was	snoring	loudly	in	the	bed	next	to	him.

“You	 kids	 need	 to	 get	 up,”	 Dad	 said	 as	 he	 pulled	 back	 the	 curtains	 to	 the room	and	let	the	sunlight	flood	in.	Jordan	flinched	and	moaned	as	though	he	was

a	creature	of	the	night	who	despised	the	light.

“Come	on	Jordan!”	Dad	hollered	at	him	as	he	took	his	pillow	and	hit	him	a

couple	of	times	with	it.	Finally	Jordan’s	eyes	opened	slowly.

Somehow,	he	managed	to	pull	himself	up.	All	Dillon	could	think	about	was

the	crash	that	John	said	he	would	experience	from	the	Centrigenix.

“What	is	it?”	Jordan	managed	to	mumble.

“We’re	 half	 way	 through	 our	 vacation	 and	 Mom	 and	 I	 have	 planned	 an awesome	hike	to	the	hot	springs,	with	lunch,	and	a	tour	around	the	outskirts	of

the	Oasis,”

Dillon	rubbed	his	face.	He	wasn’t	too	keen	on	seeing	more	of	this	place	after

the	events	of	last	night.	In	truth,	he	was	ready	to	go	home.

“Come	 on	 guys!	 It’s	 going	 to	 be	 fun,	 but	 we	 need	 to	 get	 moving	 if	 we’re going	to	have	time	to	do	everything,”	Dad	exclaimed.

Dillon	didn’t	know	what	to	think.	How	was	Jordan	going	to	make	such	a	trip

in	his	condition?

“So	come	on	guys.	I	want	you	up	and	down	stairs	in	an	hour	so	we	can	get

moving	on	this,”	Dad	said	as	he	headed	for	the	door.

After	he	was	gone,	Dillon	went	over	to	his	brother	who	looked	like	he	lapsed

back	 into	 a	 coma.	 “Hey	 Jordan.	 Are	 you	 gonna	 be	 alright?	 That	 Centrigenix really	kicked	your	butt!”

Jordan	 looked	 over	 at	 his	 little	 brother;	 his	 eyes	 were	 a	 little	 bloodshot.

“What	are	you	talking	about?”	he	asked.	“Centri	…	what	…	?”

Dillon	thought	Jordan	was	messing	with	him	at	first,	but	when	he	mentioned

the	 weird	 creatures	 they	 battled,	 and	 the	 monster	 who	 used	 to	 be	 “the	 gate keeper”	 Troy,	 and	 how	 Jordan	 had	 super-human	 power	 to	 help	 defeat	 the creatures,	his	brother	scoffed	at	him.

“You	 and	 your	 imagination,”	 he	 said	 as	 he	 rolled	 back	 over	 and	 pulled	 the pillow	over	his	head.

Dillon	 sat	 back,	 not	 quite	 understanding	 what	 was	 going	 on.	 Then	 he

remembered	 that	 after	 they	 got	 out	 of	 the	 the	 main	 lab,	 they	 went	 to	 another smaller	room	with	more	lab	equipment	where	John	was	able	to	use	some	sort	of

chemical	compound	to	break	down	the	neurogenic	implant	in	himself	and	Gwen

so	that	they	wouldn’t	be	subject	to	being	controled	anymore.	After	he	was	done,

he	 also	 said	 that	 he	 needed	 to	 inject	 Gwen	 and	 Jordan	 with	 another	 mixture which	was	supposed	to	help	them	both	overcome	any	of	the	possible	side	effects

of	having	the	invasive	materials	inside	of	them,	and	to	help	Jordan	recover	easier when	the	Centrigenix	wore	off.

Dillon	wondered	if	any	of	those	injections	could	be	the	cause	of	the	apparent



memory	loss.	He	needed	to	find	out.	He	needed	to	see	Gwen	right	away.

“BOY,	 WHAT	 IS	 IT	 WITH	 THESE	 KIDS	 TODAY?”	 DILLON	 HEARD	 HIS	 DAD	 SAY	 TO

himself	as	he	saw	him	coming	out	of	the	girl’s	room.

“Everything	okay	Dad?”	he	asked	as	he	approached	the	room.

“Oh,	it’s	okay.	Just	dealing	with	kids	that	don’t	want	to	get	up,	even	though

it’s	already	ten.”

“Let	me	see	if	I	can	help,”	Dillon	said	as	he	moved	passed	Dad	and	pushed

the	 door	 open.	 “Time	 to	 rise	 and	 shine!”	 he	 yelled	 as	 he	 came	 into	 their	 room and	 jumped	 on	 the	 nearest	 bed.	 Claire	 groaned.	 Gwen	 didn’t	 look	 much	 better when	he	promptly	jumped	over	and	began	to	shake	her.

After	 about	 five	 minutes	 of	 shaking	 and	 yelling	 he	 realized	 that	 it	 wasn’t going	to	work.	He	left	the	room	and	went	to	find	Dad.

“Hey	Dad,”	he	called	out	as	he	entered	his	parent’s	room.	“Jordan	and	Gwen

don’t	look	well.	Maybe	they	came	down	with	a	bug	or	something?	I	think	we’ll

have	to	postpone	our	day	trip.”

“Oh	…	okay,”	Dad	replied,	looking	a	little	dejected.	“I	guess	we’ll	just	have

to	find	something	else	to	do	until	they	get	better.”

That’s	 one	 of	 the	 things	 that	 Dillon	 really	 liked	 about	 his	 Dad,	 he	 always tried	to	look	for	the	silver	lining	in	his	experiences.

“I’ll	go	and	check	on	them	and	see	if	they	need	anything,”	said	Mom	as	she

moved	passed	Dillon	and	into	the	hall.

Dillon	offered	his	Dad	a	little	smile	before	exiting.

Jordan	ended	up	staying	in	bed	that	entire	day.	When	Gwen	finally	got	up	at

the	 crack	 of	 3:00,	 Dillon	 managed	 to	 have	 some	 conversations	 with	 her	 and probed	 her	 about	 the	 night	 before	 without	 saying	 anything	 too	 definite	 about what	 happened.	 He	 asked	 questions	 such	 as:	 “How	 was	 your	 night?	 What	 did you	do?	What	time	did	you	get	to	bed	at?	Who	were	you	with?”	The	answers	she

gave	 definitely	 told	 him	 that	 she	 too	 was	 experiencing	 memory	 loss.	 The troubling	 question	 he	 had	 was:	 “Why	 did	 Derek	 and	 John	 leave	 his	 memories

intact?”

He	 still	 had	 a	 ton	 of	 unanswered	 questions	 he	 wanted	 to	 ask	 Derek,	 but	 in truth,	 he	 didn’t	 even	 know	 if	 he	 would	 see	 him	 again.	 The	 whole	 thing	 was	 a whirlwind;	almost	dreamlike.	The	only	troubling	fact	was	that	he	knew	it	wasn’t

a	dream.	Dillon	had	definitely	been	in	danger	multiple	times	throughout	his	time here;	or	at	least	that’s	what	he	thought.	He	started	to	doubt	the	experiences	of	the last	few	days. Was	he	really	in	danger? 	he	thought	to	himself.	Then	he	noticed the	lines	of	cuts	on	his	hand	where	the	spider	had	gotten	him.	No.	He	knew	that

it	 was	 real.	 He	 knew	 he	 had	 experienced	 real	 fear,	 and	 he	 definitely	 was responsible	for	the	death	of	Troy.	The	problem	was	that	he	couldn’t	tell	anyone

about	it.

He	spent	most	of	that	night	by	himself,	laying	by	the	pool	and	contemplating

his	recent	experiences.	He	laughed	at	Dad’s	jokes	and	enjoyed	seeing	his	sister

have	fun	in	the	pool.	Most	of	it	was	an	act	as	he	really	didn’t	feel	like	laughing.

He	really	enjoyed	watching	his	little	sister	have	fun	given	the	fact	that	she	could have	been	seriously	hurt	or	killed	the	night	before,	and	she	didn’t	even	seem	to remember	 it.	 Perhaps	 it	 was	 for	 the	 best.	 He	 almost	 wished	 that	 his	 memories would	be	taken	from	him;	that	he	could	have	the	images	he	saw	scrubbed	from

his	mind.

It	was	during	this	contemplative	time	that	he	knew	what	he	had	to	do	when

he	got	home:	he	had	to	confide	in	Sarah.	He	knew	that	she	would	believe	him.

She	was	his	best	friend;	the	only	friend	he	could	count	on	one	hundred	percent.

“You	 okay	 Dillon?”	 came	 Mom’s	 soft	 voice.	 “You	 look	 depressed	 or

something.”

“Ya	…	of	course	I’m	good.	Just	a	little	tired.	That’s	all.”

“Okay	 honey.	 Just	 so	 you	 know,	 I’m	 here	 for	 you	 if	 you	 want	 to	 talk,”	 she ended	as	she	got	up	and	strolled	over	to	the	edge	of	the	pool.

Sure! Dillon	 thought. Hey	 mom.	 I	 just	 want	 to	 let	 you	 know	 that	 this	 place was	 created	 by	 a	 chemical	 serum	 called	 Genesis	 which	 was	 stolen	 by	 some madmen.	I	fought	a	bunch	of	creatures	which	were	created	by	a	by-product	of	the serum	 called	 Necrotoxin;	 Jordan	 juiced	 himself	 up	 with	 Centrigenix	 and	 was awesome	at	fighting	battles	in	an	underground	secret	lab	where	him,	Gwen,	and



I	were	almost	killed!	Oh	yeah	…	I	guess	I	forgot	to	mention	that	your	youngest daughter	had	a	mind	control	chip	implanted	in	her	which	made	her	turn	against Jordan	 and	 I!	 Oh	 and	 …	 by	 the	 way	 …	 both	 of	 them	 have	 had	 their	 memories erased	 which	 means	 you	 need	 to	 take	 my	 word	 for	 it.	 And	 don’t	 forget	 the	 fact that	 this	 whole	 family	 vacation	 was	 setup	 in	 order	 for	 a	 secretive	 group	 called Orion	to	get	me	here	because	I,	apparently,	have	some	sort	of	special	ability	to uncover	clues	or	something	like	that.	Ya	…	I’m	sure	she	would	listen!

Dillon	chuckled	to	himself.

What	a	ride! he	thought	to	himself. What	a	ride	indeed!

THE	 FINAL	 WEEK	 OF	 THE	 HUNT	 FAMILY	 VACATION	 WAS	 UNEVENTFUL	 WHICH	 WAS

quite	alright	with	Dillon.	Things	seemed	to	be	back	to	normal:	Jordan	was	back

to	 his	 irritating	 self,	 Gwen	 was	 as	 playful	 as	 ever,	 and	 Claire	 was	 …	 well	 …

Claire.	They	were	able	to	go	on	their	hike,	enjoy	the	springs,	and	see	the	rest	of the	sights.

Dillon	conspicuously	noted	the	absence	of	the	bike	shop	lady,	Tara.	He	was

sure	 that	 Orion	 was	 dealing	 with	 all	 those	 shady	 figures	 who	 were	 behind	 the whole	Oasis	thing.	That	brought	some	disturbing	thoughts	to	him	regarding	the

future	 of	 the	 resort.	 He	 wondered	 if	 the	 place	 was	 going	 to	 get	 shut	 down	 and what	was	going	to	become	of	all	those	who	lived	here?	From	what	he	gathered,

most	of	the	residents	were	completely	innocent.

It	was	actually	a	weird	feeling	to	be	finally	enjoying	himself.	It	took	a	couple of	 days	 but	 he	 stopped	 looking	 over	 his	 shoulder	 or	 jumping	 at	 every	 sound while	they	were	hiking	through	the	forest.	The	best	part	about	it	was	that	Dillon didn’t	have	anymore	strange	dreams.	That	was	a	total	relief	to	him!

He	 really	 wished	 that	 he	 had	 an	 opportunity	 to	 talk	 to	 Derek,	 or	 someone, about	 his	 dreams,	 but	 he	 felt	 so	 strange	 about	 them	 that	 he	 was	 afraid	 to	 even mention	 them.	 He	 couldn’t	 figure	 out	 how	 they	 could	 have	 been	 so	 real	 in picturing	events	that	eventually	formed	into	some	sort	of	reality—not	exactly	as he	pictured	them	but	in	rough	form.	He	definitely	had	a	hard	time	thinking	that



anyone	would	believe	him,	and	he	didn’t	want	to	be	labeled	as	a	crackpot.	The

only	people	who	might	even	entertain	the	fact	that	they	were	real	were	probably

Derek	and	Sarah,	and	he	never	had	a	chance	to	speak	with	Derek	about	it.

He	 reasoned	 at	 that	 moment	 that	 if	 he	 had	 the	 courage	 to,	 he	 would	 talk	 to Sarah	about	it.	He	knew	she	would	understand.

DILLON	 THREW	 HIS	 CLOTHES	 INTO	 HIS	 SUIT	 CASE	 HAPHAZARDLY.	 HE	 TRIED	 TO

separate	the	dirty	ones	from	the	clean	ones,	but	he	wasn’t	really	concerned	about it;	he	knew	Mom	would	take	care	of	that	when	they	got	home.	He	tossed	a	pair

of	 pants	 into	 the	 suitcase	 and	 heard	 something	 hard	 fall	 onto	 the	 ground.	 He looked	down	and	noticed	JTS’s	watch.	He	reached	down	and	scooped	it	up.	He

knew	he	had	given	all	of	John’s	stuff	back,	including	the	watch.

“How	did	this	get	in	my	pants ?” he	mumbled	to	himself.

He	went	back	into	the	case	and	started	rummaging	around	to	see	if	there	was

anything	else	unusual	in	any	of	his	other	clothes.	Nothing.	He	held	the	watch	up before	him	and	opened	it.	A	small	slip	of	paper	dropped	out.	He	picked	it	up	and unfolded	it.	It	was	a	letter	from	Derek!

DILLON,

THE	 ORION	 GROUP	 WOULD	 LIKE	 TO	 THANK	 YOU	 FOR	 YOUR	 DILIGENT	 EFFORT	 IN

helping	 us	 with	 this	 case.	 Because	 of	 you	 many	 people	 were	 spared	 and	 you helped	avert	a	possible	catastrophe	as	we	have	learned	that	Troy	and	the	others behind	 The	 Oasis	 Resort	 were	 planning	 on	 weaponizing	 the	 Necrotoxin	 and selling	it	to	those	who	have	no	conscience	about	using	it	to	harm	others.

More	 than	 that,	 I	 would	 like	 to	 thank	 you	 for	 your	 help	 personally.	 You excelled	beyond	all	of	my	expectations	with	your	skill	and	resourcefulness.	I	am sorry	that	your	brother	and	sister	got	involved.	As	it	turned	out,	Jordan	ended	up



being	one	of	the	biggest	assets	in	helping	us	win.	It’s	too	bad	we	had	to	wipe	his memory	of	those	heroic	events.	It’s	for	his	own	good.

I	know	that	you	have	many	more	questions	that	weren’t	answered.	You	need

to	be	patient.	Those	answers	will	come	in	time.	Until	then,	take	care	of	yourself Dillon	Hunt.

YOUR	FRIEND	ALWAYS,

DEREK	VICO

DILLON	PONDERED	THE	LETTER	FOR	A	LONG	TIME.	IT	SEEMED	TO	SUGGEST	TO	HIM

that	he	hadn’t	seen	the	last	of	Derek	and	this	Orion	Group.	He	tucked	the	letter away	in	a	safe	place	and	carried	on	with	getting	his	stuff	packed.

As	 he	 continued	 to	 pack	 he	 didn’t	 notice	 his	 sister,	 Claire,	 staring	 at	 him through	his	partially	closed	door.	She	watched	as	he	placed	the	letter	and	watch in	a	side	pocket	of	the	suitcase.	If	Dillon	wasn’t	so	occupied	with	the	thoughts that	were	whirling	through	his	mind	as	he	considered	the	contents	of	the	letter	he might	 have	 noticed	 Claire’s	 glowing	 yellow	 eyes	 as	 she	 peered	 at	 him	 through the	cracked	door.

AS	 DILLON	 CAME	 BACK	INTO	 THE	 LOBBY	 AFTER	 PUTTING	 THE	 LAST	 OF	 THE	 BAGS

in	 the	 van	 he	 saw	 Tom	 Tom	 standing	 behind	 the	 front	 desk	 with	 Janeen.	 Dad seemed	 to	 be	 conversing	 with	 him	 easily.	 Dillon	 ran	 over	 to	 the	 old	 man.	 He hadn’t	seen	him	since	that	fateful	night	when	they	just	barely	made	it	out	of	the lab	alive.

“Tom	Tom!”	he	yelled	as	he	hurried	over.	When	he	approached	the	desk	he

composed	himself,	trying	hard	not	to	seem	too	excited	to	see	his	new	friend.

“Hi	Dillon,”	Tom	Tom	said	to	the	young	boy.

“Hey.	How	are	you	feeling?”

“Feeling?”	Tom	Tom	replied,	raising	an	eyebrow.

“I	mean	…”	he	began,	“…	the	last	I	heard	of	you	is	that	you	weren’t	feeling

well.	But	of	course	that	was	a	week	ago.” Good	cover! he	thought	to	himself.

“Oh	yes.	I’m	quite	well.	As	a	matter	of	fact,	I	was	just	telling	your	Dad	that	I have	been	named	the	next	Executive	Officer	of	the	resort.”

“What!	 That’s	 awesome!”	 Dillon	 responded,	 not	 able	 to	 contain	 his

enthusiasm.

“What’s	more	is	that	Tom	Tom	here	has	just	informed	me	that	our	family	has

been	 drawn	 in	 some	 sort	 of	 guest	 lottery	 which	 means	 that	 we	 have	 won	 all-expenses	paid	vacations	here	every	year	for	the	next	five	years!”	Dad	exclaimed.

Dillon	was	speechless!

“That’s	right	Dillon,”	said	Tom	Tom,	“it’s	the	least	we	could	do	to	show	our

appreciation	to	one	of	our	guest	families;	especially	one	as	deserving	as	yours.”

He	winked	at	Dillon,	a	sign	the	young	boy	didn’t	miss.

“You’re	too	kind,”	Dad	said	appreciatively.	“Thank	you.”

“No.	It’s	the	least	we	could	do.”	He	turned	back	to	Dillon.	“I	guess	we’ll	see

you	again	then	Dillon.”

Dillon	smiled	widely.	It	sounded	to	him	like	things	at	the	resort	were	going

to	be	alright	after	all.

As	his	family	rolled	through	the	gate	and	onto	the	highway	that	led	through

the	desert,	Dillon	looked	back.	He	really	didn’t	know	what	had	just	happened	to

him	over	the	last	two	weeks;	it	all	seemed	surreal.	What	he	did	know,	however,

is	that	things	would	never	be	the	same	for	him	again.





E P I L O G U E

Jake	opened	the	large	doors	which	led	to	the	study.

The	size	of	the	doors	were	an	indication	to	the	grandness	of	the	library

which	lay	beyond.	There	were	large	vaulted	rows	of	shelves	stretching	the

entire	 length	 of	 the	 massive	 room.	 At	 the	 very	 end	 of	 the	 room	 was	 an enormous	window	through	which	multitudes	of	radiant	rays	from	the	sun	rained

down	illuminating	the	inside	of	the	chamber	with	its	warmth.

Down	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 room	 were	 large	 tables,	 most	 of	 which	 had	 an assortment	of	books,	maps,	and	other	rolled	parchment	strewn	about	them	in	no

discernible	 pattern.	 The	 place	 resembled	 an	 archaic	 library	 that	 housed	 ancient books	 of	 ages	 gone	 by.	 There	 were,	 however,	 on	 one	 of	 the	 tables	 an	 array	 of computer	 equipment	 that	 added	 a	 modern	 touch	 to	 the	 ambiance	 of	 the	 aged place.

Standing	to	the	side	of	one	of	the	computers	was	a	man	who	appeared	to	be

deep	in	thought	as	he	looked	down	at	a	large	opened	book.	The	man	had	short

cropped	 white	 hair,	 a	 medium-lengthed	 white	 beard,	 and	 was	 wearing	 a	 set	 of large	 round	 glasses	 that	 were	 sitting	 on	 the	 end	 of	 his	 nose	 which	 allowed	 his eyes	 to	 glance	 overtop	 them	 as	 he	 read	 the	 information	 from	 the	 book	 he	 had open	 before	 him.	 He	 had	 on	 a	 sweater	 overtop	 a	 collared	 shirt,	 and	 his	 pants appeared	to	be	beige	Kakis.	Sitting	on	the	table	just	above	the	book	was	a	small stone	statue.

As	 Jake	 approached,	 he	 saw	 the	 man	 glance	 up	 from	 his	 work,	 apparently

alerted	by	his	presence.	“Hello	Stephen,”	greeted	Jake.

Stephen	didn’t	appear	overly	happy	to	see	the	agent	of	Orion.	“What	are	you

doing	here?”	he	asked	as	he	slammed	the	book	shut,	his	voice	full	of	accusation.

When	he	spoke	he	articulated	his	words	in	such	a	way	that	one	could	tell	that	he was	well	educated	and	probably	came	from	a	well-refined	upperclass	society.

“Come	now,	aren’t	you	glad	to	see	me?”	came	Jake’s	reply,	trying	to	sound

as	though	he	was	wounded	by	the	cold	greeting.

Stephen	seemed	to	soften	up	a	bit.	“Sorry,”	he	replied.	“It’s	just	that	I’m	in

the	middle	of	something	and	the	answers	aren’t	coming	as	fluidly	as	they	used

to.	It’s	actually	quite	maddening!”

Jake	 didn’t	 say	 a	 word,	 but	 appeared	 as	 if	 he	 was	 interested.	 This	 was	 his way	 of	 coaxing	 others	 to	 speak.	 He	 often	 didn’t	 have	 to	 ask	 what	 their	 issues were,	 he	 would	 just	 wait	 and	 portray	 having	 a	 sympathetic	 ear	 which	 would cause	them	to	just	open	up	to	him.

“I	have	this	relic	here,”	Stephen	started	to	say,	“well	…	it’s	actually	a	copy	of a	relic,”	he	picked	it	up	off	the	table.

It	was	a	small	statue	about	eight	inches	high	and	appeared	to	be	in	the	shape

of	 a	 woman	 holding	 a	 small	 gem	 out	 in	 front	 of	 her	 with	 both	 hands.	 Stephen held	it	up	in	order	for	Jake	to	get	a	better	look	at	it.

“You	 see	 this	 here,”	 he	 said,	 pointing	 at	 the	 gem.	 Jake	 nodded.	 “We	 are unsure	if	she	is	offering	this	to	someone	or	if	she	is	using	it	in	some	way.”

Jake	looked	confused.	“Does	it	matter?”

“Does	it	matter!?	Of	course	it	matters!	We	think	that	this	is	one	of	the	rouge

stones	 from	 myth,	 but	 we	 aren’t	 sure	 …	 I’m	 not	 sure,”	 his	 voice	 trailed	 off, showing	his	frustration	with	his	lack	of	knowledge.

Jake	stayed	silent,	giving	him	a	moment	to	compose	himself.

“According	 to	 legend,	 the	 rouge	 stones	 are	 in	 the	 custody	 of	 guardians	 of some	sort,	but—so	the	tales	say—one	of	them	is	missing	and	there	are	rumours

that	it	was	given	to	someone	so	they	could	hide	it.”	He	put	the	statue	down.	“In truth,	 we	 don’t	 know	 if	 any	 of	 this	 is	 accurate	 or	 not,	 and	 the	 literature	 I	 have doesn’t	 provide	 any	 clues.	 If	 the	 guardians	 do	 exist	 then	 they	 have	 done	 a fantastic	job	keeping	their	whereabouts	and	society	a	secret.”

“We	 have	 reason	 to	 believe	 they	 exist,”	 Jake	 said	 unwaveringly.	 “What	 we don’t	know	are	the	specifics	Dr.	Specifics	which	you	need	to	get	for	us.”

“What	 reasons	 do	you	have?”	asked	Stephen.

“That	is	classified,”	said	Jake	with	a	smile.

“Great!	That’s	not	helpful.”

Jake	 leaned	 on	 the	 table.	 “What	 about	 your	 …	 powers?	 Can’t	 you	 utilize those	to	assist	you	in	your	research?”

Stephen	scoffed.	“What	powers?	Those	have	faded	away	a	long	time	ago.”

Jake	smiled.	“Don’t	worry,	we’ve	found	someone	else	who	has	your	unique

abilities.”

The	Dr.	looked	at	Jake	suspiciously.	“Who?”

Jake’s	smile	got	even	wider,	“Dillon	Hunt.”

Stephen	 rocked	 back	 a	 step.	 His	 face	 went	 pale	 and	 displayed	 a	 look	 of absolute	horror.	“No!	You	can’t!	He’s	only	a	boy.”

“Yes	…	a	very	resourceful	boy.	He	was	immensely	helpful	in	helping	us	get

back	the	Genesis	serum.”	He	paused	for	effect.	“As	a	matter	of	fact,	a	couple	of the	Hunt	kids	were	very	helpful.”

“You	can’t,”	Stephen	whimpered,	tears	welling	up	in	his	eyes.

“Unfortunately	Dillon’s	father,	Bruce,	never	inherited	these	traits.	They	say

that	 sometimes	 these	 things	 skip	 a	 generation,”	 Jake	 said	 as	 he	 picked	 up	 the replica	statue.

“I	won’t	cooperate	anymore	if	you	drag	him	into	this,”	the	Dr.	spouted.

“Oh	…	I	think	you	will,”	replied	Jake.	“Dillon	will	help	us	whether	you	will

or	not.	It	might	be	in	your	best	interest	for	you	to	play	along	with	us	Dr.	Hunt.

“Don’t	 worry,	 we	 won’t	 use	 Dillon	 for	 this	 mission	 just	 yet,”	 he	 stated, indicating	 the	 statue	 he	 was	 holding.	 “We	 have	 other	 plans	 and	 items	 we	 need him	to	find	first.”

Dr.	Hunt	slumped	down	into	a	nearby	chair,	unable	to	say	anything.	He	never

wanted	his	grandson	to	be	involved	with	Orion.	He	always	wished	that	the	traits

he	 acquired	 would	 stop	 with	 him,	 but	 apparently	 they	 hadn’t.	 Dillon	 was	 now marked	as	an	asset	by	Orion.	An	asset,	he	knew,	they	would	exploit	to	the	best	of their	ability.


